
9147041558900Sex, Gender and Culture
























	GENDER AND CONTEMPORARY PHILIPPINE SOCIETY 2020.MODULE 5	155 | P a g e
Sex, Gender and Culture
























	GENDER AND CONTEMPORARY PHILIPPINE SOCIETY 2020.MODULE 5	155 | P a g e
36576155447Module 5
Gender and Health Issues and Programs

Page

5.1 GENDER AND MENTAL
HEALTH
157
5.2 ADOLESCENT RISKY
BEHAVIOR
168
5.2.1 Substance Abuse
168
5.2.2 Unprotected Sexual
Behaviors
174
5.3 GENDER, SEXUAL AND
REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH
190
5.4 GENDER AND NUTRITION
209
5.5 GOVERNMENT HEALTH
INTERVENTION
221


















GENDER AND CONTEMPORARY PHILIPPINE SOCIETY.2020
President Ramon Magsaysay State University

9147049913315	GENDER AND CONTEMPORARY PHILIPPINE SOCIETY 2020.MODULE 5	156 | P a g e
	GENDER AND CONTEMPORARY PHILIPPINE SOCIETY 2020.MODULE 5	156 | P a g e
2743291446GENDER AND CONTEMPORARY PHILIPPINE SOCIETY.2020
President Ramon Magsaysay State University

Module 5
HGeaelntdh eIrssauneds
and Programs

MODULE 5
GENDER AND HEALTH ISSUES AND PROGRAMS


Intended Learning Outcomes:

At the end of this lesson, students should be able to:

		Understand what is mental health and well-being, as well as the factors that affect them;
	Know how to protect and promote mental health and well-being;
		Know the signs of mental health deterioration, common mental health issues, and how to properly address them; and
		Know how RA 11036 or The Mental Health Act of 2018 support Filipino mental health.
		
	GENDER AND MENTAL HEALTH

Introduction

From the projection of the World Health Organization during the start of the millennium, one in every four individuals will suffer from mental health problems at some point in their lives and that 450 million people worldwide have a mental health problem (WHO, 2001). In 2015, the global prevalence of common mental illnesses such as depression and anxiety disorders are estimated at 5.5% and 3.6%, respectively; suicide accounts for 1.5% of global deaths in the same year (WHO, 2017). WHO (2004) suggests that this widespread occurrence of mental health problems are often untreated and can cause role performance impairment.
Surely, mental health concerns produce a significant burden to its victims. Recent studies suggests that these concerns can cause days out of work, loss of productivity, financial drain from treatment costs, family and caregiver stress and loss

of life (Bronsard et al., 2016; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2011). Thus mental health concerns, being developmental in nature and etiology, are best addressed through preventive measures during early age. Educational institutions, being the students’ primary environment during their formal educational years, should establish systems, wherein actual and potential mental health problems among the youth can be addressed.


DISCUSSION

Mental Health and Well-being

Mental health is an essential aspect of our overall health. As stated on the constitution of the World Health Organization (WHO): “Health is a state of complete physical, mental, and social well-being and not just merely the absence of disease or infirmary.” Thus the WHO recognizes that it is not enough that one is free from any mental disorder, rather it puts premium on the holistic state and quality of life of an individual, especially on wellness and happiness. Mental health refers to cognitive, behavioral, and emotional well-being. It focuses on how people think, feel, and behave, which directly affects their daily living, intra- and interpersonal relationships, and above all, the physical health.
Well-being, on the other hand, is the presence of positive emotions and moods (such as happiness and contentment), the absence of negative emotions (such as anxiety and depression), satisfaction with life, fulfillment and positive functioning. In short, well-being is the state of feeling good and seeing life positively. Surely, mental health and well-being are related, with good mental health, one can realize his/her own abilities, live long and cope with the normal stresses of everyday living, and can productively contribute to his/her community.

Factors that Affect our Mental Health and Well-being

Multiple social, psychological, and biological factors determine the condition of our mental health and well-being at any point in time. However it worth noting that good mental health depends of the intricate balance of these factors. For example, violence and persistent socio-economic pressure are among the leading risks to mental health (WHO, 2018). Poor mental health can also be associated with rapid social changes, stressful work conditions, gender discrimination, social exclusion, unhealthy lifestyle, physical illness, and human rights violations. Yet, there are also specific psychological and personality factors that make people vulnerable to mental health concerns.

Below are the groups of factors that can influence our mental health and well-
being:
	Environmental Factors. These are the influences that are outside our body systems and can be further be divided into:

Modifiable Factors. These are factors that changes over time.
	Socio-economic conditions
	Occupation
	Social involvement
	Education
	Housing quality
	Gender
Non-Modiafiable. These are factors that are permanent.
	Ethnicity
	Genetic Factors. This is the factor that is inherited.
	Genetics

Promotion and Protection of Mental Health and Well-being

Protecting and promoting health involves improving one’s well-being. In doing such, one must create or be in an environment that supports mental health through respecting and protecting one’s basic rights such as: human rights, political rights, socio-economic rights, and cultural rights. Without the security and freedom provided by these rights, it is difficult to maintain a high level of well-being, thus resulting to poor mental health condition.

Hence, national mental health policies should be concerned not only with those individuals living with mental health issues, but also the promotion of well-being, in general, which should be mainstreamed into governmental and nongovernmental policies and programs like:
	Socioeconomic empowerment;
	Social support to the elderly population;
		Programs for the vulnerable population, including the minorities and indigenous people;
	Violence intervention programs;
	Community development programs;
	Poverty reduction and social protection for the poor;
	Anti-discrimination laws and campaigns;
	Protection of human rights;
		Promotion of humane treatment and opportunities for individuals with mental health disorder.
Signs of Deteriorating Mental Health

Everyone, at some point, are at risk of developing mental health disorder, no matter their age, sex, socio-economic status, or ethnicity. Although every mental disorder has a specific set of signs and symptoms, it is a good practice to reflect and keep one’s condition checked. Also, it should be made clear that we could experience the following signs once in a while, except hallucinations and delusions, especially if we are stressed. However, when the following signs impair one’s occupational and social functioning, it is advisable to seek professional help. Although there are many

online resources and individuals (e.g. psychology graduates, social workers) that has knowledge with the different mental health conditions, only mental health professionals, such as psychologist and psychiatrist, are allowed to do evaluation and diagnosis of mental health concerns.

	Withdrawing from family, friend, and colleagues;
	Avoiding activities that you naturally enjoy;
	Sleeping too much or too little;
	Eating too much or too little;
	Feelings of hopelessness;
	Consistently low energy;
	Using mood-altering substance, such as alcohol or nicotine, more frequently;
	Displaying negative emotions;
	Being confused and forgetful;
	Being unable to do usual daily tasks, such as getting to work or cooking meal;
	Thinking of causing physical harm to self or others;
	Hearing voices no one else can hear rather than you (hallucinations); and
	Experiencing delusions.

Common Mental Health Concerns

	Anxiety Disorders

Anxiety Disorders are group of disorders that share a common feature of excessive fear and anxiety and related behavioral disturbances. Fear is the emotional response to real or perceived imminent threat, while anxiety is anticipation of future threat. Often, these two stages overlap, but they really differ with fear more associated with surges of automatic thoughts of fight or flight, thoughts of immediate danger, and escape behaviors, while anxiety is associated with muscle tension and vigilance in preparation for future danger and cautious avoidant behaviors.
Gender–Related Diagnosis Issues

In clinical settings, generalized anxiety disorder is diagnosed somewhat more frequently in females than in males (about 55%-60% of those presenting with the disorder are female). In epidemiological studies, approximately two-thirds are female. Females and males who experience generalized anxiety disorder appear to have similar symptoms but demonstrate different patterns of comorbidity consistent with gender differences in the prevalence of disorders. In females, comorbidity is largely confined to the anxiety disorders and unipolar depression, whereas in males, comorbidity is more likely to extend to the substance use disorders as well.
	Bipolar Disorders

Bipolar disorder is a group of disorders associated with the experience of manic/ hypomanic and depressive episodes for a specified period.

	Manic Episode is characterized by a distinct period of abnormally and persistently elevated, expansive, or irritable mood and abnormally and persistently increased goal- directed activity or energy lasting at least a week and present most of the day, nearly every day.
	Hypomanic Episode is characterized by a distinct period of abnormally and persistently elevated, expansive, or irritable mood and abnormally and persistently increased goal-directed activity or energy lasting at least at least 4 consecutive days and present most of the day, nearly every day.
	Major Depressive Episode is characterized by depressed of low mood most of the day, nearly every day, as indicated by either subjective report (e.g. feels sad, empty, or hopeless) or observation made by others combined with diminished interest to activities pleasurable before and changes in sleeping and eating pattern (increase or decrease).

Gender–Related Diagnosis Issues

Females are more likely to experience rapid shifting of mood within a few months, and to have patterns of comorbidity that differ from those of males, including higher rates of lifetime eating disorders. Females with bipolar I or II disorder are more likely to experience depressive symptoms than males. They also have a higher lifetime risk of alcohol use disorder than are males and a much greater likelihood of alcohol use disorder than do females in the general population.
	Depressive Disorders

Unlike before, Bipolar disorders and Depressive disorders used to be under a single family of Mood disorders. However, the two has been separated and the distinguishing feature of all disorders under the depressive disorders is the presence of sad, empty, or irritable mood, accompanied by somatic (body) and cognitive (mind) changes that significantly affect individual’s capacity to function.
Gender–Related Diagnosis Issues

Although the most reproducible finding in the epidemiology of major depressive disorder has been a higher prevalence in females, there are no clear differences between genders in symptoms, course, treatment response, or functional consequences. In women, the risk for suicide attempts is higher, and the risk for suicide completion is lower. The disparity in suicide rate by gender is not as great among those with depressive disorders as it is in the population as a whole.
	Schizophrenia spectrum

Schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorders are characterized by abnormalities in one or more of the following domains: delusion, hallucinations, disorganized thinking (speech), disorganized of abnormal motor behavior, and negative symptoms.
	Delusions

Delusions are fixed beliefs that are not amenable to change in light of conflicting evidences. Delusions are deemed bizarre if they are clearly implausible and not understandable to same-culture peers and do not derive from ordinary life experience. For example, the belief that an outside force has removed his/her internal organs and replaced with other’s internal organs without leaving any would or scar.
	Hallucinations
Hallucinations are perception-like experiences that occur without an external stimulus. These perceptual experiences are vivid and clear, with full force and impact of normal perception, and not under voluntary control. Auditory hallucinations are the most common in schizophrenia spectrum, which is experienced as of voices, familiar or unfamiliar, that are perceived as distinct from individual’s own thoughts.
	Disorganized Thinking (Speech)
Disorganized thinking (formal thought disorder) is typically inferred from the individual’s speech. The individual may switch from one topic to another (derailment or loose associations). Answers to questions may be obliquely related or completely unrelated. Rarely, speech may be severely disorganized that is in nearly incomprehensible (incoherent).
	Disorganize or Abnormal Motor Behavior
Disorganized behavior or abnormal motor behavior may manifest itself in a variety of ways, ranging from childlike “silliness” to unpredictable agitation. Problems may be noted in any form of goal-directed behavior, leading difficulties in performing activities of daily living.
	Negative Symptoms
	Diminished emotional expression includes reduction in expression of emotions in the face, eye contact, intonation of speech, and movement of the hand, head, ad face that normally give emotional emphasis to speech.
	Avolition is a decrease in motivated self-initiated purposeful activities. The individual may sit for long periods of time and show little interest in participating in work or social activities.
	Alogia is manifested by diminished speech output.

	Anhedonia is the decreased ability to experience pleasure from positive stimuli or a degradation in the recollection of pleasure previously experienced.
	Asociality refers to the apparent lack of interest in social interactions and may be associated with avolition, but it can be also a manifestation of limited opportunities for social interactions.
Gender–Related Diagnosis Issues

The general incidence of schizophrenia tends to be slightly lower in females, particularly among treated cases. Symptoms tend to be more affect-laden among females, and there are more psychotic symptoms, as well as a greater tendency for psychotic symptoms to worsen in later life. Other symptom differences include less

frequent negative symptoms and disorganization. Finally, social functioning tends to remain better preserved in females. There are, however, frequent exceptions to these general cautions.
Addressing Mental Health Concerns

There are various ways for managing mental health problems. Treatment is highly individual, and what works for one person many not work for another. Some strategies or treatments are more successful when combined with others. A person living with a chronic mental disorder may choose different options at various stages in their life, yet assessment of effectivity of treatment will still be assessed by mental health professionals. With this, the individual needs to work closely with the mental health professional who can help him/her identify his/her immediate needs and provide him/her with suitable treatment which may include:
	Self-Help

A person who needs to cope with one’s mental health difficulties will usually need to make changes with his/her lifestyle to facilitate wellness. Changes may include reducing alcohol intake, change in sleeping, eating, and social engagement patterns. Some may need a time away from work or resolve issues with personal relationships that may cause damage to their mental health and well-being.
	Psychotherapy

This type of therapy takes a psychological approach (such as counseling, behavioral modification) in treating mental health difficulties, not necessarily mental disorders. Through this approach, the therapist, as well as the concerned individual will understand the root of the maladjustment and start to work on how to cope healthily with it and reduce the risk of relapse. Psychiatrists, psychologists, and some highly skilled counselor are the mental health professional who are allowed to carry out this type of treatment.
	Medication

Some people take prescribed medications, such as antidepressants, antipsychotics, and anxiolytic drugs that are prescribe only by medical doctors (psychiatrist or physicians). Although these drugs cannot take away the mental health difficulty one is facing, it may improve and control the prevalence the signs and symptoms. Eventually it will help the individual resume with his/her social interactions and normal routine while they, the therapist and the individual, work on the latter’s mental health condition.

Above all these, any treatment would be ineffective or less effective without a helping and supportive physical and social environment. It should be emphasized that the treatment for an individual faced with mental health difficulties or living with a mental disorder will not only be dealing with the individual, but also those who close, will taking care or living with him/her, such as immediate family. The family itself, or a member, for example will also be undergoing “coaching” on how to properly address the concerns of the individual.

Republic Act 11036 or Mental Health Act of 2018 as the Government Response to Philippine Mental Health Issues

The first legislation on mental health in Philippine history was formally signed into law and was passed on 21 June 2018 as the Republic Act No. 11036. The law aims at creating a national mental health policy aimed at enhancing the welfare of the population in schools, workplaces and communities, stressing the inherent right of all Filipinos to mental health. It also highlights the balanced delivery of mental health services (community-based and hospital-based) with more focus on persons with psychiatric, neurologic, and psychosocial health needs, and overcoming society’s attitudinal challenges that they may live free from stigma and discrimination.
The law grants protection to persons availing psychiatric, neurologic and psychosocial health services by recognizing their right to access evidence-based mental health services at all levels of the national health care system free from stigma and discrimination; their family members, caregivers, or appointed legal representatives by recognizing their right to receive appropriate psychosocial support and participate in all activities involving the service user; while reinforcing the mental health professional’s right to a safe and supportive environment, and to participate in continuous professional development programs.
Summary:

Mental health is a vital part of our overall health. It focuses on the soundness of our cognitive and behavioral functioning and it is influenced by a number of factors which could be environmental or genetic in nature.

Having known its importance, it should rightfully be protected, promoted, and mainstreamed in government and nongovernmental policies, and one of which is through securing our basic human rights. However, no matter how we protect our mental health, each and every one of us has an innate susceptibility to develop a mental health concern, which has different signs and symptoms, depending on the type of concern developed.
In response to mental health concerns, mental health professional and advocates use several approaches on how to dealing with these mental health problems, such as self-help, psychotherapy, and medication. Also, the Philippine government had legislated RA 11036 or the Mental Health Act which aims to strengthen the Philippine health system in catering the needs of Filipino people faced with mental disorder, as well as ensuring their rights.


	ADOLESCENT RISKY BEHAVIOR

Introduction

According to the World Health Organization, teenagers aged 10 to 19 are about
1.2 billion people, or 1 in 6 of the world population. Most are healthy but there are still some teenagers faced with substantial premature death, disease, and injury. Illnesses can hinder their ability to grow to full potential. The use of alcohol or tobacco, lack of physical activity, unprotected sex and/or exposure to violence could endanger not only their current health, but also their health as adults and even the health of their future children.

Promoting healthy behaviors in adolescence and taking steps to better protect young people from health risks are crucial to the prevention of health problems in adulthood, and to the development and prosperity of future health and capability of countries.
DISCUSSION
	Substance Abuse

As reported by the World Health Organization, substance abuse refers to the negative or risky use of psychoactive substances, including alcohol, and illegal drugs. Unregulated intake of these substances can cause drug dependence syndrome a cluster of behavioral, cognitive, and physiological phenomena that develop after repeated substance use and that typically include a strong desire to take the drug, difficulties in

controlling its use, persisting in its use despite harmful consequences, a higher priority given to drug use than to other activities and obligations, increased tolerance, and sometimes a physical withdrawal state
Causes

Like with many mental health disorders, a number of factors can contribute to drug addiction development, which generally are:
	Environment. Environmental factors, including the beliefs and attitudes of your family and exposure to a peer group which promotes drug use, tend to play a role in the initial use of drugs.
	Genetics. Once you have started using a drug, inherited (genetic) traits may affect the development into addiction, which may delay or accelerate the progression of the disease.
Risk factors

People of any age, sex or economic status can become addicted to a drug. Certain factors can affect the likelihood and speed of developing an addiction:
	Family history of addiction. Substance abuse is more common in some families and likely involves genetic predisposition. If you have a blood relative, such as a parent or sibling, with alcohol or drug addiction, you're at greater risk of developing a drug addiction.
	Mental health disorder. If you have a mental health disorder such as depression, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) or post-traumatic stress disorder, you're more likely to become addicted to drugs. Using drugs can become a way of coping with painful feelings, such as anxiety, depression and loneliness, and can make these problems even worse.

	Peer pressure. Peer pressure is a strong factor in starting to use and misuse drugs, particularly for young people.
	Lack of family involvement. Difficult family situations or lack of a bond with your parents or siblings may increase the risk of addiction, as can a lack of parental supervision.
	Early use. Using drugs at an early age can cause changes in the developing brain and increase the likelihood of progressing to drug addiction.
	Taking a highly addictive drug. Some drugs, such as stimulants, cocaine or opioid painkillers, may result in faster development of addiction than other drugs. Smoking or injecting drugs can increase the potential for addiction. Taking drugs

considered less addicting — so-called "light drugs" — can start you on a pathway of drug use and addiction.

Both legal and illegal drugs have chemicals that can change how our body and mind work. They can give you a pleasurable “high,” ease your stress, or help you avoid problems in your life, which makes it appealing to use. These drugs and substances includes:
	Alcohol

Alcohol affects everyone differently. But if you drink too much and too often, your chance of an injury or accident goes up. Heavy drinking also can cause liver and other health problems or lead to a more serious alcohol disorder.
	Barbiturates, benzodiazepines and hypnotics

Barbiturates, benzodiazepines and hypnotics are prescription central nervous system depressants. They're often used and misused in search for a sense of relaxation or a desire to "switch off" or forget stress-related thoughts or feelings.
	Caffeine

Caffeine is the most commonly used mood-altering drug in the world. And yes, too much caffeine can be harmful to our health. Studies have also found a link between caffeine use and several psychiatric syndromes, including caffeine-induced sleep disorder and caffeine-induced anxiety disorder. Patients diagnosed with generalized anxiety disorder, panic disorder, primary insomnia, and gastroesophageal reflux are usually advised to reduce or eliminate regular caffeine use.
	Cigarettes and other Tobacco Products

You may not think of these as drugs. But tobacco has a chemical called nicotine that gives you a little rush of pleasure and energy. The effect can wear off fast and leave you wanting more. You can abuse and get addicted to the nicotine in cigarettes, just like other drugs.
	Club drugs or Party Drugs

Club drugs are commonly used at clubs, concerts and parties. Examples include ecstasy or molly (MDMA), gamma-hydroxybutyric acid (GHB), flunitrazepam and ketamine. These drugs are not all in the same category, but they share some similar effects and dangers, including long-term harmful effects.
Because GHB and flunitrazepam can cause sedation, muscle relaxation, confusion and memory loss, the potential for sexual misconduct or sexual assault is associated with the use of these drugs.

	Cocaine

This drug speeds up your whole body. When you use cocaine, you may talk, move, or think very fast. You may feel happy and full of energy. But your mood may then shift to anger. You may feel like someone is out to get you. It can cause you to do things that don’t make sense.
	Heroin

Heroin gives you a rush of good feelings at first. But when it wears off, everything slows down. You’ll move and think more slowly, and you may have chills, nausea, and nervousness. You may feel a strong need to take more heroin to feel better.
	Inhalants

Some commonly inhaled substances include glue, paint thinners, correction fluid, felt tip marker fluid, gasoline, cleaning fluids and household aerosol products. Due to the toxic nature of these substances, users may develop brain damage or sudden death.
	Marijuana

Marijuana can make you feel silly and laugh for no reason. Or you may feel sleepy and forget things that just happened. Driving while high on pot is just as dangerous as drunk driving. And heavy marijuana use can leave some people “burned out” and not think or care about much.
	Methamphetamine

Methamphetamine, or crystal meth, is a stimulant drug similar in many ways to amphetamines, the second most popular class of illicit drugs after marijuana in the world.

Meth was synthesized back in the 1880s and was widely used in the Second World War by soldiers on both sides, who were provided with the drug by their governments as an aid to alertness. This led to the first wave of meth use when the public gained access to this government-issued drug.
	Opioid painkillers

Opioids are narcotic, painkilling drugs produced from opium or made synthetically. This class of drugs includes, among others, heroin, morphine, codeine, methadone and oxycodone. Some people who've been using opioids over a long period of time may need physician-prescribed temporary or long-term drug substitution during treatment.
Signs of Substance Use Problem

When you first start taking a substance, you may think you can control how much you use. But over time, you may need more of the drug to get the same feeling or effect. For some people, that can lead beyond abuse to addiction. Signals that you may have a problem with substance abuse include if you:

	Lack interest in things you used to love;
	Change your friends a lot;
	Stop taking care of yourself;
	Spend more time alone than you used to;
	Eat more or less than normal;
	Sleep at odd hours;
	Have problems at work or with family; and
	Switch quickly from feeling good and bad
Complications

Drug use can have significant and damaging short-term and long-term effects. Taking some drugs can be particularly risky, especially if you take high doses or combine them with other drugs or alcohol. Here are some examples.

	Methamphetamine, opiates and cocaine are highly addictive and cause multiple short-term and long-term health consequences, including psychotic behavior, seizures or death due to overdose.

	GHB and flunitrazepam may cause sedation, confusion and memory loss. These so-called "date rape drugs" are known to impair the ability to resist unwanted contact and recollection of the event. At high doses, they can cause seizures, coma and death. The danger increases when these drugs are taken with alcohol.

	Due to the toxic nature of inhalants, users may develop brain damage of different levels of severity.
Other life-changing complications

Dependence on drugs can create a number of dangerous and damaging complications, including:
	Getting a communicable disease. People who are addicted to a drug are more likely to get an infectious disease, such as HIV, either through unsafe sex or by sharing needles.
	Other health problems. Drug addiction can lead to a range of both short-term and long-term mental and physical health problems. These depend on what drug is taken.
	Accidents. People who are addicted to drugs are more likely to drive or do other dangerous activities while under the influence.

	Suicide. People who are addicted to drugs die by suicide more often than people who aren't addicted.
	Family problems. Behavioral changes may cause marital or family conflict and custody issues.
	Work issues. Drug use can cause declining performance at work, absenteeism and eventual loss of employment.
	Problems at school. Drug use can negatively affect academic performance and motivation to excel in school.
	Legal issues. Legal problems are common for drug users and can stem from buying or possessing illegal drugs, stealing to support the drug addiction, driving while under the influence of drugs or alcohol, or disputes over child custody.
	Financial problems. Spending money to support drug use takes away money from other needs, could lead to debt, and can lead to illegal or unethical behaviors.
Prevention

The best way to prevent substance abuse is not to take the illegal drugs at all or take substances that is legal and prescribed. If your doctor prescribes a drug with the potential for addiction, use care when taking the drug and follow the instructions provided by your doctor. Health experts prescribe these medications at safe doses and amounts and monitor their use so that you're not given too great a dose or for too long a time. If you feel you need to take more than the prescribed dose of a medication, talk to your doctor.
Preventing drug misuse in children and teenagers

Take these steps to help prevent drug misuse in your children and teenagers:
	Communicate. Talk to your children about the risks of drug use and misuse.
	Listen. Be a good listener when your children talk about peer pressure, and be supportive of their efforts to resist it.
	Set a good example. Don't misuse alcohol or addictive drugs. Children of parents who misuse drugs are at greater risk of drug addiction.
	Strengthen the bond. Work on your relationship with your children. A strong, stable bond between you and your child will reduce your child's risk of using or misusing drugs.
	Preventing a relapse

Once you've been addicted to a drug, you're at high risk of falling back into a pattern of addiction. If you do start using the drug, it's likely you'll lose control over its use again — even if you've had treatment and you haven't used the drug for some time.
	Stick with your treatment plan. Monitor your cravings. It may seem like you've recovered and you don't need to keep taking steps to stay drug-free. But your chances of staying drug-free will be much higher if you continue seeing your

therapist or counselor, going to support group meetings and taking prescribed medication.
	Avoid high-risk situations. Don't go back to the neighborhood where you used to get your drugs. And stay away from your old drug crowd.
	Get help immediately if you use the drug again. If you start using the drug again, talk to your doctor, your mental health professional or someone else who can help you right away.

	Unprotected Sexual Behaviors

STD, which stands for sexually transmitted disease, or sometimes referred to as sexually transmitted infections (STIs) are infections that spread from person to person through risky sexual activities, such as:
	Engaging in to unprotected sex;
	Having sex with many partners, especially anonymous partners;
	Having sex while using drugs or alcohol. Using drugs and alcohol can affect a person's judgement, which can lead to risky behaviors.

STDs don’t always cause symptoms or may only cause mild symptoms, so it is possible to have an infection and not know it. That is why it is important to get tested if you are sexually active. If you are diagnosed with an STD, know that all can be treated with medicine and some can be cured entirely. STDs are preventable. If you have sex, know how to protect yourself and your sexual partner from STDs.

The diseases, conditions, and infections below are listed in alphabetical order.
Common Sexually Transmitted Diseases
	Bacterial Vaginosis

Bacterial Vaginosis (BV) is linked to an imbalance of “good” and “harmful” bacteria that are normally found in a woman’s vagina. Having a new sex partner or multiple sex partners, as well as douching, can upset the balance of bacteria in the vagina. This places a woman at increased risk of being infected. BV rarely affects women who have never had sex. Also, one cannot get BV from toilet seats, bedding, or swimming pools.
Symptoms

Many women with BV do not have symptoms. However, some have notices the following symptoms:
	A thin white or gray vaginal discharge;
	Pain, itching, or burning sensation in the vagina;
	A strong fish-like odor, especially after sex;
	Burning sensation when urinating;
	Itching around the outside of the vagina.

Treatment

BV will sometimes go away without treatment. But if you have symptoms of BV you should be checked and treated. It is important that you take all of the medicine prescribed to you, even if your symptoms go away. A health care provider can treat BV with antibiotics, but BV may return even after treatment. Treatment may also reduce the risk for some STDs.

	Chlamydia

Chlamydia is a common STD that can infect both men and women. It can cause serious, permanent damage to a woman’s reproductive system. This can make it difficult or impossible for her to get pregnant later on. Chlamydia can also cause a potentially fatal ectopic pregnancy (pregnancy that occurs outside the womb).
Symptoms

Most people who have chlamydia have no symptoms. If you do have symptoms, they may not appear until several weeks after you have sex with an infected partner. Even when chlamydia causes no symptoms, it can damage your reproductive system.

Women with symptoms may notice
	An abnormal vaginal discharge;
	A burning sensation when urinating.
Symptoms in men can include
	A discharge from their penis;
	A burning sensation when urinating;
	Pain and swelling in one or both testicles (although this is less common).
Men and women can also get infected with chlamydia in their rectum. This happens either by having receptive anal sex, or by spread from another infected site (such as the vagina). While these infections often cause no symptoms, they can cause
	Rectal pain;
	Discharge;
	Bleeding.
You should be examined by your doctor if you notice any of these symptoms or if your partner has an STD or symptoms of an STD. STD symptoms can include an unusual sore, a smelly discharge, burning when urinating, or bleeding between periods.

Treatment

Chlamydia can be cured with the right treatment. It is important that you take all of the medication your doctor prescribes to cure your infection. When taken properly it will stop the infection and could decrease your chances of having complications later on.
	Gonorrhea

Gonorrhea is a sexually transmitted disease (STD) that can infect both men and women. It can cause infections in the genitals, rectum, and throat. It is a very common infection, especially among young people ages 15-24 years. You can get gonorrhea by having vaginal, anal, or oral sex with someone who has gonorrhea. A pregnant woman with gonorrhea can give the infection to her baby during childbirth.
Symptoms

Some men with gonorrhea may have no symptoms at all. However, men who do have symptoms, may have:
	A burning sensation when urinating;
	A white, yellow, or green discharge from the penis;
	Painful or swollen testicles (although this is less common).
Most women with gonorrhea do not have any symptoms. Even when a woman has symptoms, they are often mild and can be mistaken for a bladder or vaginal infection. Women with gonorrhea are at risk of developing serious complications from the infection, even if they don’t have any symptoms. Symptoms in women can include:
	Painful or burning sensation when urinating;
	Increased vaginal discharge;
	Vaginal bleeding between periods.
Rectal infections may either cause no symptoms or cause symptoms in both men and women that may include:
	Discharge;
	Anal itching;
	Soreness;
	Bleeding;
	Painful bowel movements.
You should be examined by your doctor if you notice any of these symptoms or if your partner has an STD or symptoms of an STD, such as an unusual sore, a smelly discharge, burning when urinating, or bleeding between periods.
Treatment

Gonorrhea can be cured with the right treatment. It is important that you take all of the medication your doctor prescribes to cure your infection. Medication for gonorrhea

should not be shared with anyone. Although medication will stop the infection, it will not undo any permanent damage caused by the disease.

It is becoming harder to treat some gonorrhea, as drug-resistant strains of gonorrhea are increasing. If your symptoms continue for more than a few days after receiving treatment, you should return to a health care provider to be checked again.
	Herpes

Genital herpes is an STD caused by two types of viruses. The viruses are called herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) and herpes simplex virus type 2 (HSV-2). Oral herpes is usually caused by HSV-1 and can result in cold sores or fever blisters on or around the mouth. However, most people do not have any symptoms. Most people with oral herpes were infected during childhood or young adulthood from non-sexual contact with saliva.
Transmission
You can get genital herpes by having vaginal, anal, or oral sex with someone who has the disease. If you do not have herpes, you can get infected if you come into contact with the herpes virus in:
	A herpes sore;
	Saliva (if your partner has an oral herpes infection) or genital secretions (if your partner has a genital herpes infection);
	Skin in the oral area if your partner has an oral herpes infection, or skin in the genital area if your partner has a genital herpes infection.

You can get herpes from a sex partner who does not have a visible sore or who may not know he or she is infected. It is also possible to get genital herpes if you receive oral sex from a sex partner who has oral herpes. On the other hand, you will not get herpes from toilet seats, bedding, or swimming pools, or from touching objects around you such as silverware, soap, or towels.
Symptoms

Herpes sores usually appear as one or more blisters on or around the genitals, rectum or mouth. The blisters break and leave painful sores that may take a week or more to heal. These symptoms are sometimes called “having an outbreak.” The first time someone has an outbreak they may also have flu-like symptoms such as fever, body aches, or swollen glands.

People who experience an initial outbreak of herpes can have repeated outbreaks, especially if they are infected with HSV-2. Repeat outbreaks are usually shorter and less severe than the first outbreak. Although the infection stays in the body for the rest of your life, the number of outbreaks may decrease over time.

You should be examined by your doctor if you notice any of these symptoms or if your partner has an STD or symptoms of an STD. STD symptoms can include an unusual sore, a smelly genital discharge, burning when urinating, or (for women) bleeding between periods.
Treatment

There is no cure for herpes. However, there are medicines that can prevent or shorten outbreaks. One of these anti-herpes medicines can be taken daily, and makes it less likely that you will pass the infection on to your sex partner(s).
	Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) / Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS)

HIV stands for human immunodeficiency virus. It harms your immune system by destroying the white blood cells that fight infection. This puts you at risk for serious infections and certain cancers. AIDS stands for acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. It is the final stage of infection with HIV. Not everyone with HIV develops AIDS.
HIV most often spreads through unprotected sex with a person who has HIV. It may also spread by sharing drug needles or through contact with the blood of a person who has HIV. Women can give it to their babies during pregnancy or childbirth.

There are many different strains of HIV that are grouped into two main types:
HIV-1: most common type worldwide
HIV-2: found mostly in West Africa, Asia, and Europe

It is possible for one person living with HIV to carry several different strains of HIV in their body at the same time.
Symptoms
Stage 1: Acute HIV Infection

Within 2 to 4 weeks after infection with HIV, about two-thirds of people will have a flu-like illness. This is the body’s natural response to HIV infection.
Flu-like symptoms can include:
	Fever
	Chills
	Rash
	Night sweats
	Muscle aches
	Sore throat
	Fatigue

	Swollen lymph nodes
	Mouth ulcers
These symptoms can last anywhere from a few days to several weeks. But some people do not have any symptoms at all during this early stage of HIV.
Stage 2: Clinical Latency

In this stage, the virus still multiplies, but at very low levels. People in this stage may not feel sick or have any symptoms. This stage is also called chronic HIV infection.
Without HIV treatment, people can stay in this stage for 10 or 15 years, but some move through this stage faster.
If you take HIV medicine every day, exactly as prescribed and get and keep an undetectable viral load, you can protect your health and have effectively no risk of transmitting HIV to your sexual partner(s).

But if your viral load is detectable, you can transmit HIV during this stage, even when you have no symptoms. It’s important to see your health care provider regularly to get your viral load checked.
Stage 3: AIDS

If you have HIV and you are not on HIV treatment, eventually the virus will weaken your body’s immune system and you will progress to AIDS (acquired immunodeficiency syndrome). This is the late stage of HIV infection.

Symptoms of AIDS can include:
	Rapid weight loss
	Recurring fever or profuse night sweats
	Extreme and unexplained tiredness
	Prolonged swelling of the lymph glands in the armpits, groin, or neck
	Diarrhea that lasts for more than a week
	Sores of the mouth, anus, or genitals
	Pneumonia
	Red, brown, pink, or purplish blotches on or under the skin or inside the mouth, nose, or eyelids
	Memory loss, depression, and other neurologic disorders
Many of the severe symptoms and illnesses of HIV disease come from the opportunistic infections that occur because your body’s immune system has been damaged.

Treatment

Currently, there's no cure for HIV/AIDS. Once you have the infection, your body can't get rid of it. However, there are many medications that can control HIV and prevent complications. These medications are called antiretroviral therapy (ART). Everyone diagnosed with HIV should be started on ART, regardless of their stage of infection or complications.

ART is usually a combination of three or more medications from several different drug classes. This approach has the best chance of lowering the amount of HIV in the blood.
	Human Papilloma Virus (HPV)

HPV is the most common sexually transmitted infection (STI). HPV is a different virus than HIV and herpes. Some types can cause health problems including genital warts and cancers. But there are vaccines that can stop these health problems from happening.
Symptoms

In most cases, HPV goes away on its own and does not cause any health problems. But when HPV does not go away, it can cause health problems like genital warts and cancer. Genital warts usually appear as a small bump or group of bumps in the genital area. They can be small or large, raised or flat, or shaped like a cauliflower.
HPV and Cancer

HPV can cause cervical and other cancers including cancer of the vulva, vagina, penis, or anus. It can also cause cancer in the back of the throat, including the base of the tongue and tonsils (called oropharyngeal cancer).

Cancer often takes years, even decades, to develop after a person gets HPV. The types of HPV that can cause genital warts are not the same as the types of HPV that can cause cancers.

There is no way to know which people who have HPV will develop cancer or other health problems. People with weak immune systems (including those with HIV/AIDS) may be less able to fight off HPV. They may also be more likely to develop health problems from HPV.
Treatment

There is no treatment for the virus itself. However, there are treatments for the health problems that HPV can cause:

		Genital warts can be treated by your healthcare provider or with prescription medication. If left untreated, genital warts may go away, stay the same, or grow in size or number.
		Cervical precancer can be treated. Women who get routine Pap tests and follow up as needed can identify problems before cancer develops. Prevention is always better than treatment.
		Other HPV-related cancers are also more treatable when diagnosed and treated early.
Vaccination

HPV vaccination is recommended at age 11 or 12 years (or can start at age 9 years) and for everyone through age 26 years, if not vaccinated already.
Vaccination is not recommended for everyone older than age 26 years. However, some adults age 27 through 45 years who are not already vaccinated may decide to get the HPV vaccine after speaking with their healthcare provider about their risk for new HPV infections and the possible benefits of vaccination. HPV vaccination in this age range provides less benefit. Most sexually active adults have already been exposed to HPV, although not necessarily all of the HPV types targeted by vaccination.
	Syphilis

Syphilis is a sexually transmitted infection that can cause serious health problems if it is not treated. Syphilis is divided into stages (primary, secondary, latent, and tertiary), with different signs and symptoms associated with each stage. A person with primary syphilis generally has a sore or sores at the original site of infection. These sores usually occur on or around the genitals, around the anus or in the rectum, or in or around the mouth. These sores are usually (but not always) firm, round, and painless. Symptoms of secondary syphilis include skin rash, swollen lymph nodes, and fever. The signs and symptoms of primary and secondary syphilis can be mild, and they might not be noticed. During the latent stage, there are no signs or symptoms. Tertiary syphilis is associated with severe medical problems. A doctor can usually diagnose tertiary syphilis with the help of multiple tests. It can affect the heart, brain, and other organs of the body.

You can get syphilis by direct contact with a syphilis sore during vaginal, anal, or oral sex. You can find sores on or around the penis, vagina, or anus, or in the rectum, on the lips, or in the mouth. Syphilis can spread from an infected mother to her unborn baby.

Symptoms

Primary Stage
	Single sore or multiple sores
3162300176432
Example of a primary syphilis sore

The sore is the location where syphilis entered your body. Sores are usually (but not always) firm, round, and painless and it can easily go unnoticed. The sore usually lasts 3 to 6 weeks and heals regardless of whether or not you receive treatment. Even after the sore goes away, you must still receive treatment. This will stop your infection from moving to the secondary stage.
Secondary Stage
	20746723656254813808365625Skin rashes and/or mucous membrane lesions









	Secondary rash on palms of hands	Secondary rash on torso Mucous membrane lesions are sores in your mouth, vagina, or anus. This stage
usually starts with a rash on one or more areas of your body. The rash can show up when your primary sore is healing or several weeks after the sore has healed. The rash can look like rough, red, or reddish brown spots on the palms of your hands and/or the bottoms of your feet. The rash usually won’t itch and it is sometimes so faint that you won’t notice it. Other symptoms you may have can include:
	Fever;
	Swollen lymph glands;
	Sore throat;

	Patchy hair loss;
	Headaches;
	Weight loss;
	Muscle aches; and
	Fatigue (feeling very tired).
The symptoms from this stage will go away whether or not you receive treatment. Without the right treatment, your infection will move to the latent and possibly tertiary stages of syphilis.
Latent Stage

The latent stage of syphilis is a period of time when there are no visible signs or symptoms of syphilis. If you do not receive treatment, you can continue to have syphilis in your body for years without any signs or symptoms.
Tertiary Stage

Most people with untreated syphilis do not develop tertiary syphilis. However, when it does happen it can affect many different organ systems. These include the heart and blood vessels, and the brain and nervous system. Tertiary syphilis is very serious and would occur 10–30 years after your infection began. In tertiary syphilis, the disease damages your internal organs and can result in death.
Treatment

Syphilis can be cured with the right antibiotics from your health care provider.
However, treatment might not undo any damage that the infection has already done.
	Trichomoniasis

Trichomoniasis (or “trich”) is a very common sexually transmitted disease (STD). It is caused by infection with a protozoan parasite called Trichomonas vaginalis. Although symptoms of the disease vary, most people who have the parasite cannot tell they are infected. The parasite passes from an infected person to an uninfected person during sex. It is not common for the parasite to infect other body parts, like the hands, mouth, or anus. It is unclear why some people with the infection get symptoms while others do not. It probably depends on factors like a person’s age and overall health. Infected people without symptoms can still pass the infection on to others.


Two Trichomonas vaginalis parasites, magnified (seen under a microscope)
Symptoms

Majority of infected people do not have any signs or symptoms. When trichomoniasis does cause symptoms, they can range from mild irritation to severe inflammation. Some people with symptoms get them within 5 to 28 days after being infected. Others do not develop symptoms until much later. Symptoms can come and go.
Men with trichomoniasis may notice:
	Itching or irritation inside the penis;
	Burning after urination or ejaculation;
	Discharge from the penis.
Women with trichomoniasis may notice:
	Itching, burning, redness or soreness of the genitals;
	Discomfort with urination;
	A change in their vaginal discharge (i.e., thin discharge or increased volume) that can be clear, white, yellowish, or greenish with an unusual fishy smell.

Having trichomoniasis can make it feel unpleasant to have sex. Without treatment, the infection can last for months or even years.
Treatment

Trichomoniasis can be treated with the right medication prescribed by your health care provider.
Prevention of Sexually Transmitted Diseases

Today, there are a variety of tools and strategies are available to lessen, if not prevent, the spread of STD’s. Below are some of the ways on how to lessen the risk or prevent the acquiring or passing on the infection:

	Abstinence, or not having sex at all;

	Limiting the number your and partner’s sexual partners, preferably, be mutually monogamous;
	Prohibiting the sharing of needles (medical use);
	Using condoms the right way every time you have sex;
									Switching	to	sexual	activities	that don’t	involve	contact	with	body fluids (semen, vaginal fluid, or blood);
	Having pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) and post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP) administered by health professionals;
	Having you and your partner tested for STD frequently;
	Taking prescribed medication, antiretroviral therapy (ART), as prescribed by health professional, if you already have STD. ART can make the amount STD in your blood (viral load) very low—so low that a test can’t detect it (called an undetectable viral load). Getting and keeping an undetectable viral load is the best thing you can do to stay healthy. If your viral load stays undetectable, you have effectively no risk of transmitting STD to your partner through sex

Summary Substance Abuse
Substance abuse is the unregulated consumption of chemical substances such as legal or illegal drugs and inhalants. The susceptibility of individuals to substance abuse is generally influenced by hereditary and environmental factors. Furthermore, these two general factors are heightened further by different risk factors.
The abuse of these substances pose many health and well-being issues and can further affect one’s daily living in general. On the other hand, the prevention or recovery from this conduct largely depends on the individual but facilitated further by the environment, especially those who are close to the individual.
Unprotected Sexual behaviors

Sexually transmitted diseases are group of highly contagious infections that is primarily passed from one person to another through sexual contact and are caused by either bacteria, fungus, or viral infections. However, these diseases may also be transferred through improper hygiene and health practices. These infections are generally cause discomfort, if not pain, in the genital area yet some does not manifest symptoms until later stages or full blown infection. There many ways on how to prevent or treat these infection, yet the best preventive measure is still abstinence.

	GENDER, SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH
Introduction
This topic examines the links between sexual and reproductive health and rights and gender equality. It explores the different pathways of empowerment that girls and women experience, and analyzes how these pathways are affected by sexual and reproductive health and rights. Policy focus and attention are given to gender equality and women’s empowerment has been growing over the last decade, and there are some areas where links are established more conclusively. Although there is strong documentation on the health benefits of investment in sexual and reproductive health, until recently the nonmedical benefits, such as higher levels of social and political participation, have been largely ignored, partly because they are difficult to measure. While the social and economic implications of sexual and reproductive health and rights are often overlooked, they are no less real. More attention is needed to explore the links between sexual and reproductive health and rights and other critical areas relating to gender equality, such as the representation of women in political and public life.




Intended Learning Objectives:
At the end of the course, learners will be able to:
	Define gender and sexual and reproductive health
		Understand the importance of gender integration and analysis in sexual and reproductive health programs
		Understand the continuum of approaches for gender integration in sexual and reproductive health projects
		Set specific goals to start working toward gender-transformative sexual and reproductive health programming
		Report highlights how ensuring sexual and reproductive health and rights for all can advance the empowerment of women and girls around the world, and ultimately contribute to achieving gender equality.

DISCUSSION
Sexual and reproductive health and rights refer to the right to have control over and decide freely and responsibly on matters related to sexuality, including sexual and reproductive health, free of coercion, discrimination, and violence.
A state of complete physical, mental, and social well-being and not merely the absence of disease or infirmity, in all matters relating to the reproductive system and its functions and processes. Reproductive health, therefore, implies that people can have a satisfying and safe sex life and that they can reproduce and the freedom to decide if, when, and how often to do so. Implicit in this last condition is the right of men and women

8763001579803to be informed and to have access to safe, effective, affordable, and acceptable methods of family planning of their choice, as well as other methods of their choice for regulation of fertility.

What are the 13 Sexual Reproductive Health Rights?



	The Right to Life

This means, among other things, that no woman’s life should be put at risk by reason of pregnancy, gender or lack of access to health information and services. This also includes the right to be safe and satisfying sex life.


	The Right to Liberty and Security of the Person

This recognizes that no woman should be subjected to forced pregnancy, forced sterilization or forced abortion.


	The Right to Equality, and to be free from all Forms of Discrimination

This includes, among other things, freedom from discrimination because of one’s sexuality and reproductive life choices.


	The Right to Privacy

This means that all sexual and reproductive health care services should be confidential in terms of physical set-up, information given or shared by the clients, and access to records or reports.


	The Right to Freedom of Thought

This means that all sexual and reproductive health care services should be confidential in terms of physical set-up, information given or shared by the clients, and access to records or reports.


	The Right to Information and Education

This includes access to full information on the benefits, risks and effectiveness of all methods of fertility regulation, in order that all decisions taken are made on the basis of full, free and informed consent.


	The Right to Choose Whether or Not to Marry and to Found and Plan a Family

This includes the right of persons to protection against a requirement to marry without his/her consent. It also includes the right of individuals to choose to remain single without discrimination and coercion.

5637269925050Denial of sexual and reproductive health and rights: a cause and consequence of gender inequality

The face of poverty is female. It is estimated that women account for two-thirds of the 1.4 billion people currently living in extreme poverty5and makeup 60percent off the 572 million working poor in the world.6 Poverty exacerbates gender inequalities and can combine to make a huge difference in people’s lives – between well- being and ill health, and sometimes between life and death.


Poverty and inequality limit opportunities for women and girls

Sexual and reproductive health and rights are critical for empowering women and girls and advancing gender equality – both to realize their rights and their access to health services. The ability of women and girls to exercise their sexual and reproductive rights to make free and informed choices about their sexual and reproductive life, and about whether and when to have children, is a central component of gender equality. At their core, sexual and reproductive health and rights mean that individuals should have the right and the means to make decisions about their reproductive lives and sexuality, free from violence, coercion, and discrimination.
914400242557The Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women


The Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women is an international human rights treaty that enshrines women’s human rights and obliges State parties to meet their obligations to fulfil and respect these rights. The Convention devotes major attention to women’s reproductive rights; notably, it is the only human rights treaty to mention  family  planning  and  guarantee
The Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women


The Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women is an international human rights treaty that enshrines women’s human rights and obliges State parties to meet their obligations to fulfil and respect these rights. The Convention devotes major attention to women’s reproductive rights; notably, it is the only human rights treaty to mention  family  planning  and  guarantee
4076700243192The Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and Reviews


The Fourth World Conference on Women in September 1995 produced the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, the most progressive blueprint ever for advancing women’s rights. As a defining framework for change, the governments that supported the Platform made comprehensive commitments under 12 critical areas of concern. Sexual and reproductive health and reproductive rights are enshrined in the Platform for Action and the 20th anniversary of Beijing opens up opportunities to regenerate commitment, and recharge political will and support for sexual and reproductive
The Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and Reviews


The Fourth World Conference on Women in September 1995 produced the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, the most progressive blueprint ever for advancing women’s rights. As a defining framework for change, the governments that supported the Platform made comprehensive commitments under 12 critical areas of concern. Sexual and reproductive health and reproductive rights are enshrined in the Platform for Action and the 20th anniversary of Beijing opens up opportunities to regenerate commitment, and recharge political will and support for sexual and reproductive


86105461462Two powerful examples of how the links between sexual and reproductive health and rights and gender equality can be explicitly enshrined in international policy commitments are the Beijing Platform for Action and the human rights treaty on the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women. The link between discrimination and women’s reproductive role is a matter of recurrent concern in both. The Platform for Action asserts women’s reproductive rights to have control over and decide freely and responsibly on matters related  to  sexuality.  The  Convention  specifically
recognizes that State parties are obliged to include advice on family planning in the education process and to guarantee women’s rights “to decide freely and responsibly on the number and spacing of their children and to have access to the information, education, and means to enable them to exercise these rights.” This means that the denial of sexual and reproductive health and rights – core women’s human rights – can be viewed as both a cause and a consequence of gender inequality

Human rights at the heart of gender equality

Sexual and reproductive health and rights are important rights in themselves, but can also greatly enhance possibilities for empowering girls and women and for achieving gender equality. We examine how sexual and reproductive health and rights interventions can have positive and lasting impacts not only on the health outcomes of girls and women but can also enable women’s access to opportunities across social, economic, and political life.

What do we mean by the empowerment of girls and women?

Pathways of Women’s Empowerment, a research consortium that explores the different pathways of empowerment that women experience, much-needed texture to concepts of empowerment. In line with this thinking, IPPF understands the concept of empowerment to include:
Challenging and transforming power relations


Empowerment is concerned with changing power relations. These power relations are related to control over resources (physical, human, intellectual, and financial) and control over ideas (beliefs, values, attitudes).


Empowerment as a relational concept. Empowerment is relational: it is about the relations of power in which people are located, within which they may experience disempowerment or come to acquire the ability to make strategic life choices.

Empowerment as a journey, not a destination. Empowerment is a multi‐dimensional process, as opposed to an end destination. Pathways of empowerment can take different forms and can be experienced individually or collectively.
Focus 1: Sexual and reproductive health and rights and the social development of girls and women
Social development refers to the processes of change that lead to improvements in personal well-being and social life. Access to quality education and health services, and freedom from sexual and gender-based violence, including harmful traditional practices, all contribute to the social development of women and girls. We examine the relationship between sexual and reproductive health and rights and three key aspects of social development: health, education, and sexual and gender-based violence. These three areas of social development are important ends in themselves but are also critical to the empowerment and equality of girls and women in other spheres of development. In particular, sexual and gender-based violence is both a cause and consequence of gender inequality and cuts across all aspects of the development of women and girls.
	Health: overcoming gendered barriers
Ensuring universal access to sexual and reproductive health services brings positive gains for the health of girls and women. If women and girls cannot maintain their good health, they are less able to take full advantage of the opportunities available to them, participate fully in society or improve their social position. This means that providing services and conditions that allow women to maintain good health is critical to women’s empowerment, gender equality, and socio‐economic development.
	Education: a key pathway for women and girls
The education of women and girls is widely recognized as a powerful tool to empower women and girls within the family and society, and is considered a key pathway to employment and earning. Educated women are more likely to marry later, use family planning and access health care; and understand their rights and have the self‐ confidence to act on them. Each additional year of schooling for girls improves their employment prospects, increases future earnings by about 10 percent, and reduces infant mortality by up to 10 percent. Comprehensive sexuality education is a promising strategy by which to shift norms and attitudes and empower young people to negotiate safe, consensual, and enjoyable sex. A review of 87 studies of comprehensive sexuality education programs around the world showed that it increased knowledge, and two‐thirds of programs to a positive impact on behavior including increased condom or contraceptive use, or reduced sexual risk‐taking. However, such programs are not available in most countries.
	Sexual and gender-based violence: compounding gender discrimination
Globally, one in three women experiences either intimate partner violence or non‐ partner sexual violence during their lifetime. Sexual and gender‐based violence results from and perpetuates harmful gender norms and cuts across all aspects of the development of women and girls. From intimate partner violence and other family

violence, t female genital mutilation, early and forced marriage, and violence as a weapon of war, it is a major public health concern in all corners of the world, a barrier to women’s empowerment and gender equality, and a constraint on individual and societal development, with high economic costs.

Sexual and reproductive health and rights programs and services are widely considered a vital access point to support survivors of sexual and gender‐based violence. Screening for violence in the context of sexual and reproductive health services can be effective in preventing the recurrence of violence and enabling the empowerment of women and girls. Given the infrequent contact by many women with the public health sector, sexual and reproductive health and rights programs and services are often a vital access point for women to address violence and power relations in their lives, improve health outcomes and, open access to opportunities.

Focus 2: Sexual and reproductive health and rights and women’s economic participation
Among the 1.6 billion workers receiving regular wages in the labor market, female workers are paid, on average, significantly less than male workers.75 Women are also over-represented as micro-entrepreneurs and small farmers, doing low-paid, low- productivity work in small firms or farms. This gendered gap in productivity and earnings is not because women are less capable, but because of women’s lower educational levels and their limited access to resources, as well as social perceptions about the role of women.
A gendered gap in productivity and earnings. Women face added vulnerabilities depending on where they work in the economy. The formal economy, informal economy, and unpaid care work are deeply intertwined. Although the percentage of women working in formal wage employment worldwide has increased steadily over the past half-century, women around the globe are still more likely to work in the informal economy. Gender inequality is the underlying reason for this imbalance and it has severe effects for marginalized groups, including young women, immigrants, women with disabilities, and transgender women. A major cause and consequence of this inequality is the fact that, in all cultures and all economies, women continue
Doing the bulk of unpaid care work which includes both paid and unpaid care work, which is primarily undertaken by women and has an impact on their work opportunities and conditions.


Focus 3: Sexual and reproductive health and rights and women’s participation in public and political life


Women’s low participation in public and political life is often shaped by the legal framework and by the nature of formal political institutions such as political parties and parliamentary structures, and electoral systems and processes. But gender norms and economic and social factors also limit women’s opportunities and capabilities to participate in decision making. Poor levels of participation and representation in decision- making bodies are worsened by intersecting types of discrimination relating to the ethnic group, socio‐economic status, religion, disability, health status (such as women living with HIV,) and sexual orientation. Those who are marginalized by dominant norms concerning gender and sexuality – such as lesbian, bisexual women, single women, divorced women, widows, and sex workers – may face serious stigma, discrimination, nor violence if they seek to participate or stand for election to public or political office. It is important to support women who are marginalized because of their sexuality and to challenge the existing legal, policy and social environments to create an enabling environment for their positive enjoyment of sexuality and their involvement in political decision making.
Responsible Parenthood and Reproductive Health Act of 2012
The Responsible Parenthood and Reproductive Health Act of 2012, also known as the Reproductive Health Law or RH Law, and officially designated as Republic Act No. 10354, is a law in the Philippines, which guarantees universal access to methods on contraception, fertility control, sexual education, and maternal care.

While there is general agreement about its provisions on maternal and child health, there is great debate on its mandate that the Philippine government and the private sector will fund and undertake widespread distribution of family planning devices such as condoms, birth control pills, and IUDs, as the government continues to disseminate information on their use through all health care centers.
Passage of the legislation was controversial and highly divisive, with academics, religious institutions, and major political figures declaring their support or opposition while it was pending in the legislature. Heated debates and rallies both supporting and opposing the RH Bill took place nationwide.
The Supreme Court of the Philippines delayed the implementation of the law in March 2013 in response to challenges. On April 3, 2014, the Court ruled that the law was "not unconstitutional" but struck down eight provisions partially or in full.
The Senate Policy Brief titled "Promoting Reproductive Health", the history of reproductive health in the Philippines dates back to 1967 when leaders of 12 countries including the Philippines' Ferdinand Marcos signed the Declaration on Population. The Philippines agreed that the population problem should be considered as the principal element for long-term economic development. Thus, the Population Commission was created to push for a lower family size norm and provide information and services to lower fertility rates.
Starting in 1967, the USAID began shouldering 80% of the total family planning commodities (contraceptives) of the country, which amounted to $3 million annually. In 1975, the United States adopted as its policy the National Security Study Memorandum 200: Implications of Worldwide Population Growth for U.S. Security and Overseas Interests (NSSM200). The policy gives "paramount importance" to population control measures and the promotion of contraception among 13 populous countries, including the Philippines to control rapid population growth which they deem to be inimical to the sociopolitical national interests of the United States, since the "U.S. economy will require large and increasing amounts of minerals from abroad", and these countries can produce destabilizing opposition forces against the United States. It recommends the U.S. leadership to "influence national leaders" and that "improved world-wide support for population-related efforts should be sought through increased emphasis on mass media and other population education and motivation programs by the UN, USIA, and USAID.
Different presidents had different points of emphasis. President Ferdinand Marcos pushed for a systematic distribution of contraceptives all over the country, a policy that  was  called  "coercive",  by  its  leading  administrator.  The Corazon Aquino administration focused on giving couples the right to have the number of children they prefer, while Fidel V. Ramos shifted from population control to population management. Joseph Estrada used mixed methods of reducing fertility rates, while Rvee Jude A. Olandsca focused on mainstreaming natural family planning, while stating that contraceptives are openly sold in the country.
In 1989, the Philippine Legislators' Committee on Population and Development (PLCPD) was established, "dedicated to the formulation of viable public policies requiring legislation on population management and socio-economic development". In 2000, the Philippines signed the Millennium Declaration and committed to attaining the MDGs by

2015, including promoting gender equality and health. In 2003, USAID started its phase- out of a 33-year-old program by which free contraceptives were given to the country. Aid recipients such as the Philippines faced the challenge to fund its own contraception program. In 2004, the Department of Health (DOH) introduced the Philippines Contraceptive Self-Reliance Strategy, arranging for the replacement of these donations with domestically provided contraceptives.
In August 2010, the government announced a collaborative work with the USAID in implementing a comprehensive marketing and communications strategy in favor of family planning called May Plano Sila (literally "they have a plan").

The basic content of the Consolidated Reproductive Health Bill is divided into the following sections.
SEC. 1. The Responsible Parenthood and Reproductive Health Act of 2012 SEC. 2. Declaration of Policy
SEC. 3. Guiding Principles SEC. 4. Definition of Terms
SEC. 5. Midwives for Skilled Attendance SEC. 6. Emergency Obstetric Care SEC. 7. Access to Family Planning
SEC. 8. Maternal and Newborn Health Care in Crisis Situations SEC. 9. Maternal Death Review
SEC. 10. Role of the Food and Drug Administration
SEC. 11. Procurement and Distribution of Family Planning Supplies
SEC. 12. Integration of Family Planning and Responsible Parenthood Component in Anti-Poverty Programs
SEC. 13. Roles of Local Government in Family Planning Programs
SEC. 14. Benefits for Serious and Life-Threatening Reproductive Health Conditions SEC. 15. Mobile Health Care Service
SEC. 16. Mandatory Age-Appropriate Reproductive Health and Sexuality Education SEC. 17. Additional duty of the local population officer.
SEC. 18. Certificate of Compliance
SEC. 19. Capability Building of Barangay Health Workers SEC. 20. Pro Bono Services for Indigent Women
SEC. 21. Sexual and Reproductive health
SEC. 22. Right to Reproductive Health Care Information SEC. 23. Implementing Mechanisms
SEC. 24. Reporting Requirements SEC. 25. Congressional Committee SEC. 26. Prohibited Acts
SEC. 27. Penalties
SEC. 28. Appropriations
SEC. 29. Implementing Rules and Regulations
SEC. 30–32. Separability Clause, Repealing Clause, Effectivity


	GENDER AND NUTRITION
Introduction
This topic is designed to help students apply a gender lens to nutrition-related programming in the rural sector. It is divided into three sections. The first section provides an overview of how gender relations influence pathways to nutrition in the rural sector. The second section describes different ways in which nutrition-sensitive programs in the rural sector can be more effective if they consider gender equality and the empowerment of women. The third section provides guidelines for strengthening the gender dimensions of nutrition-sensitive programs in the rural sector.


Intended Learning Objectives
At the end of the course, learners will be able to:
		Explore the interrelationships between gender equality, food security and nutrition
	Describe how gender relations influence pathways to nutrition in the rural sector.
		Enumerate different ways in which nutrition-sensitive programs in the rural sector can be more effective if they consider gender equality and the empowerment of women
		Define the guidelines for strengthening the gender dimensions of nutrition- sensitive programs in the rural sector.

DISCUSSION
	Gender equality matters for nutrition
Rural women and girls in low-income countries play an important role in maintaining household food and nutrition security through three key channels: agriculture and food; care practices; and health. With the skills and knowledge that they possess, they offer very real opportunities to lower levels of malnutrition. In order to maximize these opportunities, rural women and girls need to be able to make choices around accessing the assets and services required for improved nutrition – they need to be empowered. This process of empowerment depends on the underlying social norms that dictate societal attitudes towards the value of women and girls. There is plenty of evidence to suggest that levels of hunger are higher in countries with a lower degree of gender equality
Rural men tend to control assets and make important decisions around the use of assets such as land, income or technology for food production. Rural women generally operate in the ‘private’ sphere as providers of meals and ‘carers’ of household wellbeing. Their productive and economic roles tend to be under-valued and unsupported, and they are restricted in the choices that they can make in accessing assets and services for food and nutrition security. This process of disempowerment can grow or diminish over time and will depend on a range of factors, such as location, wealth, age, religion, position in a household or marital status. It stems from discriminatory social norms that pervade all levels of society and that place a lesser value on a woman and girl than on a man and boy. Gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls matter for nutrition because they have an important bearing on the three underlying determinants of nutrition: food security; care practices; and health. These are summarized in Figure 5.1.


Figure 5.1. The central role of gender in determining nutrition
	What is malnutrition and who is malnourished?
Malnutrition encompasses all forms of nutrient imbalances, including undernutrition as well as being overweight or obese. Whilst recognizing that being overweight and obese are an increasingly serious problem in low-income countries, this Brief is largely informed by experience of the linkages between gender and undernutrition.
Undernutrition is the physical outcome of insufficient dietary intake and/or infectious disease. Undernutrition can appear in several different forms, singly or in combination:
	low birth weight (and small for gestational age);
	stunting (low height compared to age);
	wasting (low weight compared to height);
	underweight (low weight for age);
	micro-nutrient deficiency (such as anemia, goiter, night-blindness and lowered immunity, which result from inadequate iron, iodine, vitamin A and zinc, respectively).

Different forms of malnutrition can co-exist in the same area, household and even individual. The 2017 Global Nutrition Report shows that 88% of countries for which data

were available still face a serious burden of either two or three forms of malnutrition (childhood stunting, anemia in women of reproductive age and/ or being overweight in adult women). Two billion people lack key micronutrients; 151 million children are stunted; million children are wasted; and nearly 2 billion adults are overweight or obese.
Global progress is not rapid enough to meet the sustainable Development Goal (SDG) target 2.2 to end all forms of malnutrition by 2030. No country is on track to meet the targets to reduce anemia amongst women of reproductive age; the number and percentage of women with anemia has actually increased since 2012. The achievement of global targets recedes further as famine cycles become more frequent, putting the nutrition security of millions of people in peril.
In 2017, the north-east states of Nigeria, South Sudan, Somalia and Yemen experienced significant acute food insecurity and malnutrition. In low-income countries, national data show that marginally more boys than girls are under-nourished up to the age of five and there is some evidence that this pro-girl bias continues into adolescence. However, high and increasing levels of anemia in women and girls of reproductive age is universally acknowledged as a serious concern because of their reproductive role.
Addressing malnutrition Development programs can contribute to nutrition security through nutrition-specific and nutrition-sensitive interventions. Nutrition-specific interventions address the immediate causes of malnutrition and tend to be linked to health or humanitarian programs. These commonly focus on the 1000 days that span pregnancy and the first two years of a child’s life, a period that has been identified as critical for preventing long-term malnutrition. Examples include: optimizing maternal nutrition, early and exclusive breastfeeding, micro-nutrient supplementation, and management of acute malnutrition. Nutrition-sensitive interventions address the underlying and basic causes of malnutrition in a multi-disciplinary way, spanning the agriculture, health, WASH, education and social protection sectors.
	Gender equality influences nutrition through food security
In rural communities, especially amongst the poor, agriculture determines dietary intake. Agriculture determines diets either directly or indirectly: directly – by providing food for household consumption; indirectly – through the income from the sale of agricultural produce or from rural employment, so a household can buy more nutritious food. In low- income countries, women comprise on average 43% of the agricultural labor force and in some regions this is increasing. They work as unpaid family laborer’s, pastoralists, fishers, self-employed producers and processors, commercial farmers, on and off -farm employees, traders and service providers. If a rural woman is empowered, she can make choices about assets and services – such as land, rural credit, technology, irrigation, labor, knowledge and extension – that contribute towards nutrition. It is estimated that if women worldwide had the same access to productive resources as men, they could increase the yields from their farms by 20% to 30% and total agricultural output by 2.5% to 4%. This would lift between 100 and 150 million people out of hunger. This section describes how the empowerment of rural women and girls needs to be improved for this to happen.

	Agricultural roles in a commercialized world
Rural women are responsible for a large share of dietary staples. They manage small kitchen gardens or homestead plots, producing fruit and vegetables that are rich in micronutrients for household consumption. They also play an important role in livestock husbandry, especially poultry and small ruminants, providing nutrition through meat, eggs and dairy products. A disempowered woman may not be able to decide how her produce is used. Even when she is responsible for raising poultry, her husband may force her to sell the eggs rather than keep them for her children or herself. As agriculture becomes increasingly commercialized, women are displaced from their roles as producers of nutritious food for home consumption and men, with their better access to resources and markets, take control and reap the income benefits. This can widen the income gaps between men and women, reinforcing the cycle of women’s disempowerment. In Africa, there is evidence that this widening of the gender gap in agrarian incomes is more pronounced between men and women within a household than between households.
	Control over income
Women and men have different preferences for income expenditure. As principal caregivers, women prefer to spend their income on food, health and clothing, whereas men prefer to spend their income on production, household maintenance and their personal use. A woman’s lack of bargaining power within the household means that even when she earns her own income from the sale of agricultural products, she cannot always decide on how this income is spent
	Control over land
Women who enjoy some form of land tenure security, either through inheritance or marriage, do not necessarily have control over how the land is used, even if it is jointly owned. Customary traditions favor men and boys in land and property inheritance, and widows can find themselves ‘inherited’ by their late husband’s brother, along with their land and children. Even when statutory law is non-discriminatory, traditional practices may continue to disadvantage women who may not have the knowledge or the ability to fight for their legal rights. This lack of control over land affects women’s ability to produce nutritious food or to earn sufficient income from the land to buy nutritious food. An OECD report has claimed that countries where women lack rights or opportunities over land have, on average, 60% more malnourished children than countries where women have some or equal access to land.
A.2.4 Access to irrigation
Small-scale agricultural production relies on rainfall patterns that are becoming more variable with the acceleration of climate change, particularly in sub-Saharan Africa. If farmers have access to irrigation, they can increase their crop yield by cultivating during the dry season and by growing more diverse crops. This includes increased production of nutrient-rich fruit and vegetables, which women tend to be responsible for managing. Women may lack the capital, labor or knowledge required (including measures to protect

against the increased risk of malaria that irrigation can bring), or they may lack control over the new irrigation technology to grow nutritious crops for household consumption.
	Access to finance
Credit can be important not only as a means of expanding and increasing agricultural productivity, or establishing an agribusiness, but also of maintaining household food consumption during hungry periods. Rural women do not commonly enjoy the same access to financial products as rural men. There are various reasons for this. Social norms may mean that they lack the autonomy or the mobility to travel to a financial institution. They may not have exposure to the range of financial products on offer, or they may not have the required literacy level or confidence to apply, or land or property to use as collateral.
	Access to extension and rural advisory services
Rural extension services can teach farmers how to produce more nutritious food, but these tend to be targeted more towards male rather than female farmers. This is not only because extension officers are largely male, but also because women’s roles as subsistence producers are not always recognized beyond being an ‘add-on’ to their domestic tasks, so they are denied opportunities, such as extension or training. The multiple roles that women fulfil as producers, carers and mothers leave them with little time to attend training. Social norms may also disallow them from interacting with male outsiders, considering this interaction to be a ‘male’ responsibility.
	Gender equality influences nutrition through care
Nutrition is influenced by the quality of care provided within a household and community. Rural women are considered the principal care providers, not only because of their reproductive role, but also because they are primarily responsible for household food preparation, childcare, and the health and hygiene of the household. In reality they face multiple challenges in fulfilling their role as carers. This section describes some of those challenges.
	Juggling labor, employment and care
Women’s multiple roles as carers and income earners mean that they cannot always breastfeed if they are working long hours laboring in the fi eld or in farm or non-farm employment. They are more likely to be employed in the informal agrarian sector, with low wages on insecure part-time or seasonal contracts. This may be because they do not have the time to take on a full-time contract; they have lower education and literacy levels than men; a traditional culture prevents women from straying beyond the confines of their homes; or their economic potential is undervalued. Insecure employment is unlikely to provide services and provisions, such as child care, maternity and paternity leave, or breastfeeding facilities that affect child nutrition
	Accessing clean water for good nutrition

Clean water is an essential ingredient for healthy nutrition. When contaminated water is used for drinking, food preparation or hygiene, it can lead to diarrheal diseases, worm infections and stunted growth. The task of collecting water for domestic use falls disproportionately to women and girls, especially in rural areas, who may have to walk long distances to do so. In Asia and Africa, the average distance that women walk to collect water is 6 kilometers. In some instances, these daily distances walked are likely to compromise women’s health and nutrition, as well as their ability to provide quality care for their households, or to spend time on more productive activities.
	Accessing health services and information for good nutrition
Good quality care depends on access to health and information services about nutrition and then having the capacity (time, resources and skills) to change behavior accordingly. As principal carers, women need to know about the nutritional value of the food they produce or buy and about the recommended care practices during the critical 1000 days between conception and the end of the first two years of the child’s life. These practices include exclusive and early breastfeeding. They need to be able to act on that knowledge but all too often other priorities prevent this. In cases of wasting, caused by poverty, disease, drought or conflict, women need access to specific services and support. However, social norms around women’s restricted mobility and autonomy may deprive them of the opportunity to seek such services. This disempowerment is aggravated in remote rural areas where travel is limited by poor infrastructure and women do not have the time or resources to make long journeys by foot.
	Gender equality influences nutrition through health
The health status of women and girls of reproductive age affects not only their own nutritional status, but also that of their babies. Undernutrition in mothers (including iron and calcium deficiencies) increases the risk of poor fetal growth. This can lead to childhood stunting and can, in turn, persist into adulthood if not addressed during the first two years of life. Thus, the nutritional status of girls and women of reproductive age is important for inter-generational nutrition security and it is the reason why there is an international focus on lowering the increasing rates of anemia in women and girls. This section describes some of the challenges that they face.
	Access to healthcare and information about nutrition
Women’s access to health services and information impacts on their health and nutrition. Learning about the causes and prevention of anemia, for example, can help reduce the incidences of maternal deaths and undernutrition in infants born to anemic mothers. Rural women are often denied the freedom or the choice to seek these services, especially those living in remote rural areas with poor infrastructure. This may be because they are illiterate, or lack the confidence to seek a service. Maybe their culture prevents them from travelling far from home or from having contact with outsiders, especially men. In South Asia, 25-50% of women have no say in the decisions about their own healthcare. In West Africa, this figure ranges from 30 to 85%.19
	Time use and employment

The multiple roles that rural women have to perform leave them with little spare time. These roles may include laboring long hours in fields, walking long distances to fetch fuel wood and water, or informal employment at the lower levels of the rural value chains under poor working conditions. Such types of work can lead to over-exertion and exhaustion and compromise their health and nutrition status, especially when pregnant or breastfeeding.
	Food consumption patterns
Even if a household has an adequate supply of nutritious food, this does not always lead to healthy nutrition levels for all its members. During periods of economic stress women are often the first to stop eating, despite the risks to their own health and pregnancy and to the long-term nutrition security of the family. Traditional customs and beliefs may influence eating habits and food taboos that deny women, especially when they are pregnant or breastfeeding, from accessing the nutrients they require. Women are likely to lack the power or the choice to overturn these traditions.
	Early pregnancy
Adolescent pregnancy can slow and stunt a girl’s growth, as well as result in poor fetal growth and a greater risk of low birth weight. One key cause of adolescent pregnancy is early marriage, which in many societies – especially remote rural ones – is still considered the norm. Early marriages can be arranged by parents for a number of reasons – protection (especially in conflict and displacement), economic security for the girl and bride wealth for the parents, removing a mouth to feed, or the belief that girls do not need an education. Often, girls do not have the power or the support to refuse. Once married, as adolescents they may lack the knowledge, or the physical access to reproductive services so that they cannot control the age at which they first give birth.
	Gender-sensitive programming for nutrition in a rural world
As Section A has highlighted, an emphasis on empowering women and girls by tackling underlying discriminatory social norms needs to be embedded in all nutrition programming. This is called a Gender Transformative Approach (GTA). In the agriculture– gender–nutrition nexus, a GTA is best implemented through nutrition-sensitive programming, which moves beyond regarding women as victims of malnutrition and instead operates across sectors and at different levels of society, from national policy to household level. This section describes some of the GTAs that can be embedded in nutrition-sensitive programming in the rural world.
	Engendering laws and policies for better nutrition
In order to shift social norms that discriminate against women and girls, government investment is required. Donors’ engagement in a dialogue around legal and policy reform can strengthen understanding and change attitudes amongst key decision makers about the importance of considering gender equality to improve a country’s nutrition outcomes. Here are some of the changes that high-level dialogue can bring about.

		Policies to reduce the gender wage gap and improve conditions for female employees in the agrarian sector through secure contracts, maternity leave, child care and breastfeeding facilities.
		Family law that provides equal rights to marital property on divorce or death of spouse – including the land rights of widows.
	Extension and rural advisory services that ensure equal access for female farmers.
		Stronger links between national gender policies and national food and nutrition security policies that reflect a deeper understanding by decision makers of the important roles that women and girls play in nutrition

	Community dialogue for better nutrition
GTAs can improve nutrition outcomes through participatory methodologies (such as games, drawings, role play or drama) to bring women and men together in a reflective dialogue around harmful social norms. Engaging men in this process is key, so they understand the barriers that women face, such as accessing health and nutrition services, or the assets required for a more nutritious diet. By moving towards a collective understanding of negative social norms, these types of dialogues can encourage communities to challenge together the deep-rooted causes of discrimination, and trigger positive behavior change. Inclusion of community leaders and service providers, such as teachers, local government officials, extension workers and nurses, can speed up the process.
This type of community dialogue is unlikely to improve nutrition outcomes unless accompanied by an improvement in access to assets and services. Research in Uganda found that nongovernmental organizations were able to bring about attitudinal change towards early marriages and pregnancies, but that this needed to be accompanied by investments to strengthen access to and the quality of health services for adolescent girls.
	Knowledge and skills for better nutrition
Community dialogue can be accompanied by eff orts to increase rural women’s knowledge and skills to improve nutrition. Building up their capacity for homestead food production will help increase dietary diversity by allowing them to grow fruits and vegetables or tend to small livestock, whilst fulfilling their domestic and child care responsibilities. This may also provide them with additional income to accumulate assets. Knowledge and skills can be channeled through the arts (including radio soap operas, phone-in programs or drama), or through community-level organizations, such as farmer organizations, credit groups, or cooperatives, which will also provide women with opportunities for pooling information, peer to peer learning and role models.
Training men and women together in groups can increase knowledge around, for example, optimal child feeding practices, dietary diversity, sanitation and hygiene, and the use of health services. It can also change attitudes towards gender relations. In Zambia, a program to mobilize access to maternal and new-born health services included dissemination of key messages to men and women, such as the special care that pregnant women need. As a result of this program, men now understand about the types

of food that pregnant women need, and have changed their attitudes towards pregnant women working in the fields. An impact evaluation has recently been carried out of a 3- year initiative in Bangladesh that aimed to identify actions and investments in agriculture to promote agricultural diversity, increase farm household income, improve nutrition and empower women. The evaluation found that whilst men and women benefited from agricultural training, women learned more so that crop diversity increased substantially in homestead gardens. Similarly, increases in nutrition knowledge were greater for women than men and this knowledge improved nutrition outcomes, with improvements in household diet quality and child dietary diversity.
	Households collaborate for better nutrition
‘Household methodologies’ specifically aim to change gender relations within the household by encouraging members to plan together for a future vision. They center around men and women understanding each other’s roles, the barriers and opportunities that they face, and supporting each other by sharing resources rather than working in conflict. Evidence has shown that these methodologies have a direct impact on food and nutrition security by bringing household members together to care jointly about their food and nutrition security needs.
	Moving forward: strengthening gender equality in nutrition-sensitive rural programs
This section begins by describing the commitment to gender-sensitive nutrition programming and then provides tips for conducting a gender analysis for nutrition- sensitive programming in the rural sector and for establishing gender sensitive indicators to track progress.
The SDGs call for an end to all forms of malnutrition (2.2) and an end to all forms of discrimination against women and girls (5.1). The SDGs address the gender-related barriers to nutrition that have been mentioned in this Brief, such as social protection (1.3); early marriage (5.3); care work (5.4); women’s decision making (5.5); sexual and reproductive health (5.6); legislation for gender equality (5.C); nutritional needs of adolescent girls, pregnant and lactating women (2.2); and women’s rights to productive services and resources including land (2.3).
	Gender analysis
Nutrition programming in the rural sector must be reinforced by an in-depth understanding of how women’s empowerment and social norms impact on the quality of pathways to nutrition. It must take into account how these are continuously changing, are influenced by the wider social, political and cultural environment, and vary from one context to another.
There are many different frameworks for conducting a gender analysis. Reverting to the central circle in Figure 1, the following three key areas of enquiry can be followed to inform nutrition sensitive programming.

	The different roles that rural women and men play in the three key determinants of nutrition: food; care practices; and health (gender division of labor)
	The levels of decision making and control that rural women and girls enjoy, and how this affects the fulfilment of their roles in nutrition (empowerment)
	How social and cultural attitudes and behaviors in the rural world act as key determinants of women’s and girls’ empowerment for nutrition (social norms).
These three areas of enquiry are elaborated in Table 1.
925059922513Table 5.1. Gender analysis following three key areas of enquiry for nutrition- sensitive programming




























	Measuring progress through indicators
Indicators should go beyond recording the number of female beneficiaries who have been reached by a program and track the progress towards eliminating the discriminatory social norms that prevent rural women and girls from fulfilling their potential to improve nutrition. It is not easy to find appropriate indicators because empowerment and social norm changes are processes that are not always visible or measurable in a program’s life-span and concepts, such as ‘decision making’, ‘control’ and ‘power’, are hard to capture. Many

guides and methodologies exist to help programmers set appropriate gender-sensitive indicators for nutrition. This section ends with some tips to guide programmers.
	Consider using the following two noteworthy indicators:
	Minimum dietary diversity of women of reproductive age (MDD-W). In collaboration with FAO, the EU has promoted the use of this, the first global indicator to measure women’s dietary quality.
	Women’s Empowerment in Agriculture Index (WEAI). Developed by a collaboration of agencies, this is a compound index that measures the inclusion of women in the agricultural sector. An additional PRO-WEAI has included empowerment measurements in the agriculture sector relating to nutrition and health.
		Do not be over ambitious when establishing indicators for women’s empowerment or social norm change. Indicators must attempt to measure progress towards change rather than change itself. For example, if a program aims to change gender relations within a farming household so that women can devote more time to producing nutritious food, the indicator might measure changes in women’s and men’s time use.
		It is generally acknowledged that there is a dearth of information available relating to the complex gender relationships around agriculture and nutrition. This means that setting indicators to track progress in women’s empowerment and social norm change may require lengthy field surveys to gather qualitative and quantitative information as well as training of field researchers in research methodologies. A budget for these types of surveys must be included in the program design.
		When setting indicators on nutrition status, bear in mind that sex-disaggregated data on the key forms of malnutrition only exist for children under-five. Therefore, it is not possible to compare, on a national basis, trends in malnutrition between boys and girls who are over five, or between male and female adolescents and adults.

Summary
Rural women and girls should be considered as key agents in the fight against malnutrition rather than as passive victims of malnutrition in need of assistance. In order to unleash their potential as change agents, they need to be empowered so that they can make decisions about accessing relevant assets and services. Everyone should be committed to breaking down silos and creating synergies and alignment wherever possible to the dual objective of improving nutrition and empowering women and girls through multi-sectoral approaches. These objectives need to combine investments that strengthen women’s and girls’ access to health and agricultural assets and services with investments that challenge negative attitudes and behaviors towards the role of women and girls in nutrition.


5.5 GOVERNMENT HEALTH INTERVENTION
Introduction
Health is a basic human right guaranteed by the Philippine Constitution of 1987. This is provided in the Philippines through a dual health delivery system composed of the public sector and the private sector. The public sector is largely financed through a tax-based budgeting system, where health services are delivered by government facilities under the national and local governments. The Department of Health (DOH) supervises the government corporate hospitals, specialty and regional hospitals, while the Department of National Defense runs the military hospitals. At the local level, the provincial governments manage and operate district and provincial hospitals, while municipal governments provide primary care, including preventive and promotive health services and other public health program through the rural health units, health centers and barangay health stations. Highly urbanized and independent cities provide both hospital services and primary care services. The private sector, consisting of for-profit and non- profit health-care providers, is largely market oriented, where health care is generally paid for through user fees at the point of service. The introduction of social health insurance

administered by the Philippine Health Insurance Corporation (PhilHealth) since 1995 aimed to provide financial risk protection for the Filipino people. The rapid expansion of its membership in the past 5 years is considered a positive development as the Government pursues universal health coverage.


Intended Learning Objectives
At the end of the course, learners will be able to:
Enumerate different health programs of the Department of Health integrating gender and development.

DISCUSSION
	NATIONAL SAFE MOTHERHOOD PROGRAM

Vision

For Filipino women to have full access to health services towards making their pregnancy and delivery safer
Mission

Guided by the Department of Health FOURmula One Plus thrust and the Universal Health Care Frame, the National Safe Motherhood Program is committed to provide rational and responsive policy direction to its local government partners in the delivery of quality maternal and newborn health services with integrity and accountability using proven and innovative approaches

Objectives

The Program contributes to the national goal of improving women’s health and well-being by:
		Collaborating with Local Government Units in establishing sustainable, cost- effective approach of delivering health services that ensure access of disadvantaged women to acceptable and high quality maternal and newborn health services and enable them to safely give birth in health facilities near their homes
		Establishing core knowledge base and support systems that facilitate the delivery of quality maternal and newborn health services in the country.

Program Components

Component A: Local Delivery of the Maternal–Newborn Service Package

This component supports LGUs in establishing and mobilizing the service delivery network of public and private providers to enable them to deliver the integrated maternal- newborn service package. In each province and city, the following shall continue to be undertaken:

		Establishment of critical capacities to provide quality maternal-newborn services through the organization and operation of a network of Service Delivery Teams consisting of:
	Barangay Health Workers
	BEmONC Teams composed of Doctors, Nurses and Midwives
		In collaboration with the Centers for health Development and relevant national offices: Establishment of Reliable Sustainable Support Systems for Maternal- Newborn Service Delivery through such initiatives as:
		Establishment of Safe Blood Supply Network with support from the National Voluntary Blood Program
		Behavior Change Interventions in collaboration with the Health Promotion and Communication Service
	Sustainable financing of maternal - newborn services and commodities through locally initiated revenue generation and retention activities including PhilHealth accreditation and enrolment.
Component B: National Capacity to Sustain Maternal-Newborn Services

	Operational and Regulatory Guidelines
		Identification and profiling of current FP users and identification of potential FP clients and those with unmet need for FP (permanent or temporary methods)
	Mainstreaming FP in the regions with high unmet need for FP
	Development and dissemination of Information, Education Communication materials
	Advocacy and social mobilization for FP
	Network of Training Providers
	31 Training Centers that provide BEmONC Skills Training
		Monitoring, Evaluation, Research, and Dissemination with support from the Epidemiology Bureau and Health Policy Development and Planning Bureau
		Monitoring and Supervision of Private Midwife Clinics in cooperation with PRC Board of Midwifery and Professional Midwifery Organizations
		Maternal Death Reporting and Review System in collaboration with Provincial and City Review Teams
	Annual Program Implementation Reviews with Provincial Health Officers and Regional Coordinators

Partner Institutions

	Local Government Units
	Development Partners

Policies and Laws

Republic Act No. 10354: Responsible Parenthood and Reproductive Health Law (RPRH Act of 2012)
		Administrative Order 2008-0029: Implementing Health Reforms to Rapidly Reduce Maternal and Neonatal Mortality
		Department Order 2009-0084: Guidelines Governing the Payment of Training Fees relative to the Attendance of Health Workers to Basic Emergency Obstetric and Newborn Care Skills Training Course at Duly Designated Training Centers
		Administrative Order 2011-0011: Establishment of Basic Emergency Obstetric and Newborn Care Training Centers in Regional Hospitals and Medical Centers
		Administrative Order 2015-0020: Guidelines in the Administration of Life Saving Drugs During Maternal Care Emergencies by Nurses and Midwives in Birthing Centers
		Administrative Order 2016-0035: Guidelines on the Provision of Quality Antenatal Care in All Birthing Centers and Health Facilities Providing Maternity Care Services
		Administrative Order 2018-0003: National Policy on the Prevention of Illegal and Unsafe Abortion and Management of Post-Abortion Complications
	VIOLENCE AND INJURY PREVENTION PROGRAM

Description

The first global study on premature deaths in 2009 (WHO Report) revealed that road crashes, suicide and violence were among the main causes of death worldwide for people aged 10 to 24 years. In 2011 (WHO Report), injuries were reported to be responsible for 9% of all deaths with road traffic injuries claiming nearly 3,500 lives each day, making it among the 10 leading causes of mortality globally. In response to the foregoing, WHO called upon Member States to develop measures to prevent road traffic injuries and violence. WHO recommended that such policies, strategies and plans of action be concrete and contain objectives, priorities, timetables and mechanisms for evaluation.

In the Western Pacific, WHO called on its Member States to take firmer action to reduce the region's more than 600 suicides per day. At the September 2011 Fifth Milestones in a Global Campaign for Violence Prevention (GCVP) Meeting in South Africa, the Violence Prevention Alliance (VPA) developed the plan of action geared towards increasing the priority of evidence-informed violence prevention, building the foundations for violence prevention, and implementing violence prevention strategies. Likewise, the United Nations General Assembly adopted Resolution 64/255 proclaiming 2011–2020 to be a Decade of Action for Road Safety to stabilize and reduce global road traffic fatalities by 2020.

The Global Burden of Diseases, Injuries, and Risk Factors Study conducted in 2010 showed that interpersonal violence, road injury, drowning, and self-harm (suicide) ranked sixth, 11th, 17th, and 27th, respectively, on the leading causes of premature deaths in the Philippines. Accidents are the fifth leading cause of mortality for the period

of 2005-2010 as reported in the Philippine Health Statistics of the National Epidemiology Center. The Online National Electronic Injury Surveillance System (ONEISS) Fact Sheet for 2010-2012 revealed that transport or vehicular crash was the leading cause of unintentional injuries and interpersonal violence (mauling/assault, contact with sharp objects, and gunshot) was the leading cause of intentional injuries.

The Department of Health (DOH) shall serve as the focal agency with respect to violence and injury prevention. As such, it shall design, coordinate and integrate plans, projects and activities of various stakeholders into a more effective and efficient system geared towards violence and injury prevention. The Violence and Injury Prevention Program has been institutionalized as one of the programs of the Disease Prevention and Control Bureau (DPCB) formerly, National Center for Disease Prevention and Control (NCDPC).

The program was the offshoot of Administrative Order No. 2007-0010 National Policy on Violence and Injury Prevention which was issued in 2007. After seven years in January 2014, said AO was further enhanced thru the issuance of AO 2014-0002 Revised National Policy on Violence and Injury Prevention which serves as the overarching Administrative Order of different policies concerning violence and injuries and shall include the service delivery mechanism and the well-defined roles and responsibilities of the Department of Health and other major players. The program aims to reduce mortality, morbidity and disability due to the following intentional and unintentional injuries:

	road traffic injuries
		interpersonal violence including bullying, torture and violence against women and children
	falls
	occupational and work-related injuries
	burns and fireworks-related injuries
	drowning
	poisoning and drug toxicity
	animal bites and stings
	self-harm / suicide
	sports and recreational injuries

For a comprehensive approach, the program shall coordinate with other programs like the Child Injury Prevention Program, Violence Against Women and Children Program and other DOH Offices such as the Health Facility Development Bureau, Health Emergency and Management Bureau, among others, solicit active representation from public and private stakeholders that are involved in violence and injury prevention.

VIP Program Objectives

	To reduce the number of deaths from violence and injuries
	To reduce disability caused by violence and injury
		To enhance capacity of CHDs and other stakeholders in the prevention of violence and injury

		To develop & implement evidence-based policies, standards and guidelines in the prevention of violence and injury
	To strengthen collaboration with stakeholders in the prevention violence and injury
		To ensure reliable, timely, and complete data and researches on violence and injury
	To advocate for alternative health financing schemes for trauma care

VIPP Program Strategies

	Evidence-Based Research and Electronic Surveillance System – Multi- disciplinary and multi-sectoral interventions shall be developed based on evidence-based research. DOH shall establish and institutionalize a system of data reporting, recording, collection, management and analysis at the national, regional, and local levels. An information system, that is, Online National Electronic Injury Surveillance System (ONEISS) and Philippine Network for Injury Data Management System (PNIDMS), shall be fully operationalized for this purpose.
	Networking and Alliance Building – DOH shall promote partnerships with and among stakeholders to build alliance and networks and to generate resources for activities related to VIPP.
	Capacity Building and Community Participation - DOH shall develop and enhance the violence and injury prevention capabilities of a wide range of sectors and stakeholders at the national, regional and local levels.
	Advocacy – DOH shall advocate to LGUs for ordinance development and lobby to Congress for enactment of laws.
	Equitable Health Financing Package – DOH, in collaboration with various stakeholders, shall advocate to health financing institutions and financial intermediaries,
i.e. the Philippine Health Insurance Corporation (PHIC) and insurance companies, the development and implementation of policies that would be beneficial for the victims of all forms of violence and injury.
	Service Delivery – In collaboration with stakeholders, DOH shall institutionalize systems and procedures for the integration and provision of services at the community level. In collaboration with various stakeholders, DOH shall undertake advocacy, information and education, political support, and multi-sectoral action on violence and injury prevention. Appropriate interventions at all levels of prevention shall be crucially provided.
	Six (6) E’s. Strategies shall utilize the concept of the six E’s (Education, Enactment / Enforcement, Empowerment, Engineering, Emergency Medical Service, and Engagement in surveillance and research) in the prevention of violence and injuries.

		Education entails wide dissemination of information and communication related to violence and injury prevention;
		Enactment / Enforcement of laws and policies related to violence and injury  prevention;
		Empowerment of all stakeholders in the implementation of VIPP. This also covers the provision of psychosocial support to the victims of violence and injury to help them recover from the psychological trauma;
		Engineering control provides the most effective way of reducing the cause and impact of violence and injuries. This involves the improvement of facilities and infrastructures to promote safe environments;
		Emergency Medical Services prior to hospital care. This is vital in providing pre- hospital trauma life support to the injured on site at the soonest possible time so as to prevent needless mortality or long-term morbidity or permanent disability; and
		Engagement in surveillance and research to promote evidence-based, substantial, scientific, and systematic approach to VIPP.
	WOMEN AND CHILDREN PROTECTION PROGRAM

Description

In 1997, Administrative Order 1-B or the “Establishment of a Women and Children Protection Unit in All Department of Health (DOH) Hospitals” was promulgated in response to the increasing number of women and children who consult due to violence, rape, incest, and other related cases.

Since A.O. 1-B was issued, the partnership among the Department of Health (DOH), University of the Philippines Manila, the Child Protection Network Foundation, several local government units, development partners and other agencies resulted in the establishment of women and child protection units (WCPUs) in DOH-retained and Local Government Unit (LGU) -supported hospitals. As of 2011, there are 38 working WCPUs in 25 provinces of the country. For the past years, there have been attempts to increase the number of WCPUs especially in DOH-retained hospitals, but they have been unsuccessful for many reasons.

As of 2016, a total of 94 WCPUs were established nationwide that served about 8,000 cases in the past year.
“The DOH shall provide medical assistance to victims” through a socialized scheme by the Women and Children Protection Unit (WCPU) in DOH-retained hospitals or in coordination with LGUs or other government health facilities (RA 9262:Anti-violence Violence Against Women Against Women And Their Children And Their Children Act Of 2004 )

The Department shall refer the child who is placed under protective custody to a government medical or health officer for a physical/ mental examination and/or medical

treatment (RA 7610: Special Protection of Children Against Child Abuse, Exploitation and Discrimination Act)
Republic Act No. 10354 (The Responsible Parenthood and Reproductive Health Act of 2012) highlights the elimination of violence against women and children and other forms of sexual and gender-based violence.
Vision

A gender-fair and violence-free community where women and their children are empowered
Mission

Improved strategy towards a violence-free community through more systematic primary prevention, accessible and effective response system and strengthened functional mechanisms for coordination, planning, implementation, monitoring, evaluation and reporting
Objectives

To institutionalize and standardize the quality of service and training of all women and children protection units. Specifically, the program aims to:
			Prevent violence against women and children from ever occurring (primary prevention)
			Intervene early to identify and support women and children who are at risk of violence (early intervention); and
		Respond to violence by holding perpetrators accountable, ensure connected services are available for women and their children (response).

Program Components

	Violence & Injury Prevention
	Mental Health

Partner Institutions

Local & International Development Partners:

	Council for the Welfare of Children
	Philippine Commission of Women
	Department of Social Welfare and Development
	Department of Interior and Local Government
	Department of Justice
	Department of Labor and Employment

	Philippine National Police
	National Bureau of Investigation
	Civil Service Commission
	Commission on Human Rights
	Child Protection Network
	SAVE the Children
	World Health Organization
	UNICEF
Policies and Laws

	Republic Act 7610: Anti-Child Abuse Law
	Republic Act 9262: Anti-Violence Against Women and their Children Act
	Republic Act No. 8353: Anti-Rape Law
	Republic Act 10364: Expanded Anti-Trafficking in Persons (RA 9208: Anti- Trafficking in Persons Act of 2003)
	Republic Act No. 8505: Rape Victim Assistance & Protect Act
	Republic Act 9710: Magna Carta of Women
	RA 7877: Anti-Sexual Harassment Act
	Republic Act 10354 (The Responsible and Reproductive Health Act of 2012)
	Administrative Order 1-B s. 1997: DOH Policy on the establishment of Women & Children’s Protection Units (WCPU)
	Administrative Order 2013-0011: Revised guidelines on the establishment of WCPUs in all hospitals
	Administrative Order 2014-0002: Violence and Injury Prevention
Strategies, Action Points and Timeline

		PRIMARY PREVENTION – address the underlying conditions that influence women and children's health, building a gender responsive community (family as entry point)
		SERVICE DELIVERY - foster collaborative partnerships which improve health outcomes
		ADVOCACY & SOCIAL MOBILIZATION - expand the reach and influence of our work, empowered communities
		RESEARCH & INNOVATION - research current and emerging issues affecting women and children
		ORGANIZATIONAL EXCELLENCE - ensure quality systems and practices that promote organizational sustainability, continuous improvement and innovation

	ADOLESCENT HEALTH AND DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM

Description

In April 2000, DOH issued the Administrative Order 34- A s 2000, the Adolescent and Youth Health (AYH) Policy, creating the Adolescent Youth Health Sub-program under the Children’s Health Cluster of Family Health Office. In 2006, the department created the Technical Committee for Adolescent and Youth Health Program, composed of both government and non-government organizations dedicated to uplifting the welfare of adolescents and tasked to revitalize the program. Due to an increasing health risky behaviour among our Filipino adolescents,

DOH embarked on revising the policy and to focus on the emerging issues of the adolescents which are the 10 – 19 years old.
In March 21, 2013, DOH with the support of the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) Philippines, revised the policy and served the Administrative Order 0013 - 2013 National Health Policy and Strategic Framework on Adolescent Health and Development (AHDP). The Strategic Framework 2013 is designed in accordance with this goal.
In 2015, DOH AHDP Program revived the National External Technical Working Group (TWG) on AHDP. This is composed of different stakeholders from the government, non- government, academe, and youth – led organizations. In 2016, DOH recognized the need for harmonization of programs within the department that caters 10 – 19 years old. The AHDP Program convened the first DOH – Internal Technical Working Group. This aims to ensure that all programs are working together for the betterment of the adolescents in the country. It is also an avenue to discuss indicators, policies, strategies, and service delivery at the national and local implementation levels. The External and Internal TWGs on AHDP are multi -sectoral, collaborative approaches to fulfil the goal, vision, and mission of the program. In 2017, both TWGs revised the strategic framework, and developed a logical framework, and monitoring and evaluation framework of the program.

Vision

The AHDP envisions a country with well informed, empowered, responsible and healthy adolescents who are leaders in the society
Mission

Its mission is to ensure that all adolescents have access to comprehensive health care and services in an adolescent-friendly environment.
Objectives

Improve the health status of adolescents and enable them to fully enjoy their rights to health.
Program Components

	Nutrition

	National Safe Motherhood
	Family Planning
	Oral Health
	National Immunization Program
	Dangerous Drugs Abuse Prevention and Treatment
	Harmful Use of Alcohol
	Tobacco Control
	Mental Health
	Violence & Injury Prevention
	Women and Children Protection
	HIV/STI

Partner Institutions

Local & International Development Partners:

	Department of Education
	National Youth Commission
	Commission on Higher Education
	Commission on Population
	Council for the Welfare of Children
	Department of Social Welfare and Development
	Department of Interior and Local Government
	Linangan ng Kababaihan (Likhaan)
	The Family Planning Organization of the Philippines
	Technical Education and Skills Development Authority
	Woman Health Philippines
	Save the Children
	ACT! 2015 Alliance
	Youth Peer Education Network
	Society of Adolescent Medicine in the Philippines Inc.
	Micronutrient Initiatives
	Child Protection Network
	National Nutrition Council
	Philippine National AIDS Council
	Philippine Society of Adolescent Medicine Specialist
	United Nations for Children’s Fund
	United Nations Population Fund
	United Nations Programme for HIV and AIDS
	United States Agency for International Development
	World Health Organization

Policies and Laws

	Republic Act 10354 (The Responsible and Reproductive Health Act of 2012)

						Administrative	Order No.	2013-0013 (National	Policy	and	Strategic Framework on Adolescent Health and Development)
	Administrative Order No. 2017-0012 (Guidelines on the Adoption of Baseline Primary Health Care Guarantees for All Filipinos)
	Proclamation 99 s.1992 (Linggo ng Kabataan)

Strategies, action Points and Timeline

	Health promotion and behavior change for adolescents
	Adolescent participation in governance and policy decisions
	Developing/transforming health care centers to become adolescent- friendly facilities
	Expanding health insurance to young people
	Enhancing skills of service providers, families and adolescents
	Strengthening partnerships among adolescent groups, government agencies, private sectors, Civil Society organizations, families and communities
	Resource mobilization
	Regular assessment and evaluation

	MICRONUTRIENT PROGRAM

Micronutrient deficiencies can cause inter-generational consequences. The level of health care and nutrition that women receive before and during pregnancy, at childbirth and immediately post-partum has significant bearing on the survival, growth and development of their fetus and newborn. Undernourished babies tend to grow into undernourished adolescents. When undernourished adolescents become pregnant, they in turn, may give birth to low-birth weight infants with greater risk of multiple micronutrient deficiencies.

Micronutrient deficiencies have considerable impact on economic productivity, growth and national development. Widespread iron deficiency is estimated to decrease the gross domestic product (GDP) by as much as 2% per year in the worst affected countries. Conservatively, this translates into a loss of about Php172 per capita or 0.9% of GDP. Productivity losses for anemic manual laborers have been documented to be as high as 9% for severely stunted workers and 5% and 17% for workers engaged in moderate and heavy physical labor respectively (Micronutrient Supplementation Manual of Operations)

Mandate: AO 36, s. 2010

Aquino Health Agenda (AHA): Achieving Universal Health Care for All Filipinos– Kalusugan Pangkalahatan

Goal of Micronutrient:

Achievement of better health outcomes, sustained health financing and responsive health system by ensuring that all Filipinos especially the disadvantaged group (lowest 2 income quantiles)have equitable access to affordable health care.
Objectives:

		Contribute to the reduction of disparities related to nutrition through a focus on population groups and areas highly affected or at risk to malnutrition
		To provide vitamin A capsules, iron and iodine supplements to treat or prevent specific micronutrient deficiencies
		Go to scale with key interventions on micronutrient supplementation, food fortification, salt iodization and nutrient education.
		Revive, identify, document and adopt good practices and models for nutrition improvement.
	Build Nutrition human resource in relevant departments/ agencies.

Scenario:

	Child Under nutrition

The 2008 National Nutrition survey, FNRI-DOST showed a significant decline in the prevalence of underweight-for-age under five children since 1990. However, the overall decline was not fast enough. In 2008 a 20.6% prevalence rate was recorded which is equivalent to an average annual percentage point decrease of 0.37%, however, it is lower than the targeted 0.55 annual percentage point reduction from 2000 to achieve one of the targets of Millennium Development Goal I. In addition, stunting (32.2%) among under- fives (an indication of prolonged deprivation of food and frequent bouts of infections) and wasting indicative of a lack of food or infection or both on the hand, remained at bout the 6% from 2003 to 2008.

	Maternal Under nutrition

For the past 10 years, the nutritionally-at-risk pregnant women gradually decreased since 1998, with an average change of 0.44% per year. (FNRI National Nutrition surveys 2008)

	Micronutrient Deficiencies

The 2008 National Nutrition Survey reported significant gains as levels of Vitamin A deficiency among 6-months infants to 5 years old children, pregnant and lactating women but still is a public health problem based on WHO cut off 15%. Furthermore, the prevalence rate of Iron deficiency anemia among children decreased significantly. However, percentage levels of IDA among infants 6 years old (55.7%) and pregnant women (42.5%) remain at levels that are considered high as per WHO classification of
<40% public health problem.

Iodine Deficiency is a public health problem among pregnant and lactating women. In 2008, the median UIE among 6-12 year old children was 132/ug/L, indicating adequate iodine status and only <20% of the children had UIE less than 50 ug/L. The elimination of iodine deficiency has been sustains from 2003-2008.

Among pregnant women, the median UIE was 105 ug/L represents insufficient iodine intake. Iodine deficiency in this group persists. While lactating women the median UIE was 81 ug/L represents mild iodine insufficiency.



INTERVENTIONS/ STRATEGIES EMPLOYED OR IMPLEMENTED

	Micronutrient Supplementation- is the provision of pharmaceutically prepared vitamins & minerals for treatment or prevention of specific micronutrient deficiency.
	Food Fortification- the addition of essential micronutrients to widely consumed food product at levels above its normal state.
	Improving diet/ dietary diversification- the adoption of proper food and nutrition practices thru nutrition education food production & consumption.
	Growth monitoring and promotion- is an educational strategy for promoting child health, human development and quality of life through sequential measurement of physical growth and development of individuals in the community.


	PHILIPPINE CANCER CONTROL PROGRAM

Cancers figure among the leading causes of morbidity and mortality worldwide, with approximately 14 million new cases and 8.2 million cancer related deaths in 2012 (WHO). More than 60% of world’s total new annual cases occur in Africa, Asia and Central and South America. These regions account for 70% of the world’s cancer deaths (WHO). It is expected that annual cancer cases will rise from 14 million in 2012 to 22 within the next 2 decades (WHO).
Cancer is one of the four epidemic non-communicable diseases (NCDs) or lifestyle- related diseases (LRDs) which include cardiovascular diseases, diabetes mellitus, and chronic respiratory diseases. According to Dr. Antonio Miguel Dans in his paper “Introduction to Non-Communicable Diseases” in August 2014, the NCDs are now considered a “silent disaster” of massive proportion that is ravaging the Filipino population, killing 300,000 victims a year, 800 every day, and 33 every hour. Its toll on lives is likened to “two 747 planes packed with passengers crashing every day”. Those

NCDs share common risk factors, such as tobacco use, unhealthy diet, insufficient physical activity and the harmful use of alcohol.
Cancer remains a national health priority in the country with significant implications for individuals, families, communities, and the health system. Cancer is the third leading cause of morbidity and mortality in the country after diseases of the heart and the vascular system (Philippine Health Statistics 2009). Among Filipino men, the 6 most common sites of cancer diagnosed in 2010 (Globocan) were lung, liver, colon/rectum, prostate, stomach, and leukemia. Among Filipino women the 6 most common sites diagnosed were breast, cervix, lung, colon/rectum, ovary and liver. Furthermore, 189 of every 100,000 Filipinos are afflicted with cancer while four Filipinos die of cancer every hour or 96 cancer patients every day, according to a study conducted by the University of the Philippines’ Institute of Human Genetics, National Institutes of Health.

In response to this growing and alarming epidemic of cancer, there is a need to revisit and strengthen the Philippine Cancer Control Program which started in 1990 through Administrative Order No. 89-A s. 1990, amending A.O. No. 188-A s. 1973. Hence, the National Cancer Control Committee (NCCC) developed the National Cancer Prevention and Control Action Plan (NCPCAP) 2015-2020.

The National Cancer Prevention and Control Action Plan 2015-2020 shall cover the following key areas of concern:
	Policy and Standards Development
		Development of “National Policy on the Integration of Palliative and Hospice Care into the Philippine Health Care System”
		Development and Operationalization of National Cancer Prevention and Control Website and Social Media Sites
		Development of “Comprehensive National Policy on Cancer Prevention and Control”
	Establishment of National Cancer Center and Strategic Satellite Cancer Centers
	Expansion of PhilHealth Z Benefit Package Coverage to Other Cancers
	PhilHealth Z-Benefit Package for catastrophic diseases (breast, prostate, cervical cancers and childhood acute lymphocytic leukemia) is an in- patient package which includes mandatory diagnostics, operating room expenses, doctor/professional fees, room and board, and medicines.

	Advocacy and Promotions
	Cancer Awareness Campaigns

1. National Cancer Consciousness Week
2. Colon and Rectal Cancer Awareness Month
3. Cancer in Children Awareness Month

4. Cervical Cancer Awareness Month
5. Prostate Cancer Awareness Month
6. Lung Cancer Awareness Month
7. Liver Cancer Awareness Month
8. Breast Cancer Awareness Month
9. Cancer Pain Awareness Month

		Partnership with DepEd, CHED, DOLE-Bureau of Working Conditions, and Civil Service Commission

	Capacity Building and Resource Mobilization

	Training of Trainers on Cervical Cancer Prevention and Control
	Training of Trainers on Palliative and Hospice Care
	Palliative and hospice care has been the missing link in our health care delivery system. Our Universal Health Care or Kalusugan Pangkalahatan would not be complete without integrating palliative and hospice care into the existing promotive–preventive–curative- rehabilitative continuum of care. It is therefore imperative to institutionalize and integrate palliative and hospice care both in the hospitals or health facilities and in community or home-based level.
	Training of Trainers on Patient Navigation Program
	Patient Navigation Program / Medicine Access Program: It provides chemotherapy for early stage breast cancer and acute lymphocytic leukemia and other diagnostic standard procedures for eligible patients at no cost. This project involves seven (7) government hospitals, namely: Philippine General Hospital, Jose Reyes Memorial Medical Center, East Avenue Medical Center, Rizal Medical Center, Amang Rodriguez Memorial Medical Center, Philippine Children’s Medical Center and Bicol Regional Training and Teaching Hospital.

	Service Delivery

	Availability of Free Cervical Cancer Screening in all trained RHUs
	Availability of cryotherapy equipment in every province (81 provinces)
	Availability and accessibility of screenings for selected cancers in all trained RHUs
	School-based HPV vaccination of 9 to 13-year-old females
	Hepatitis B vaccination for all health workers nationwide

	Information Management and Surveillance

	Establishment of National Cancer Registry (hospital- and population-based)

	Development and Operationalization of Cancer Helpline (including Telemedicine)

	Research and Development

	Establishment of National Research and Development Program for Cancer Control
		Research: Study on the Socio-Economic Burden and Impact Assessment of Cancer in the Philippines
	Determination of Cancer Incidence in the Philippines 2008-2013

	HEALTH AND WELLNESS PROGRAM FOR SENIOR CITIZEN

Description

In support of the RA 9257 (The Expanded Senior Citizens Act of 2003) and the RA 9994 (Expanded Senior Citizen Act of 2010), the Department of Health issued Administrative Orders for health implementors to undertake and promote the health and wellness of senior citizens as well as to alleviate the conditions of older persons who are encountering degenerative diseases.

With the goal of Health and Wellness Program for Senior Citizen of promoting quality of life among older persons and contribute to the nation building, the HWPSC intends to provide the following:
	focused service delivery packages and integrated continuum of quality care,
								patient-centered	and	environment	standard	to	ensure	safety	and accessibility for senior citizens,
	equitable health financing,
	capacitated health providers in the implementation of health programs for senior citizens,
	data base management, and
	strengthened coordination and collaboration with other stakeholders involved in the implementation of programs for senior citizens.

In the current Philippine Health Agenda (2017 - 2022), guarantees that centralize health services for care in all life stages, service delivery networks, and financial risk protection, geriatric health is mentioned as an area of concern. All senior citizens are mandatorily covered by the Philippine Health Insurance Corporation by virtue of Republic Act No. 10642 “An act granting mandatory national health insurance program of PhilHealth for all senior citizens”.

Vision

A country where all Filipino senior citizens are able to live an improved quality of life through a healthy and productive aging.

Mission

Implementation of a well-designed program that shall promote the health and wellness of senior citizens and improve their quality of life in partnership with other stakeholders and sectors.
Objectives

	To ensure better health for senior citizens through the provision of focused service delivery packages and integrated continuum of quality care in various settings.
	To develop patient-centered and environment standards to ensure safety and accessibility of all health facilities for the senior citizens.
	To achieve equitable health financing to develop, implement, sustain, monitor and continuously improve quality health programs accessible to senior citizens.
	To enhance the capacity of health providers and other stakeholders including senior citizens group in the implementation of health programs for senior citizens.
	To establish and maintain a database management system and conduct researches in the development of evidence-based policies for senior citizens.
	To strengthen coordination and collaboration among government agencies, non-government organizations, partner agencies and other stakeholders involved in the implementation of programs for senior citizens.

Program Components

		The Policy, Standards and Regulation component shall develop a unified patient-centered and supportive environment standards to ensure safety and accessibility of senior citizens to all health facilities and to promote healthy ageing in order to prevent functional decline among senior citizens.
		The Health Financing component shall promote health financing schemes and other funding support in all concerned government agencies and private stakeholders to provide programs that are accessible to senior citizens.
		The Service Delivery component shall ensure access of senior citizens to essential geriatric health services including preventive, promotive, treatment, and rehabilitation services from the national to the local level.
		The Human Resources for Health component shall capacitate the health care providers in both national and local government to be able to effectively provide technical assistance and implement the program for senior citizens.
		The Health Information component shall establish an information management system and maintain a repository of data.
		The Governance for Health component shall coordinate and collaborate with the local government units and other stakeholders to ensure an effective and efficient delivery of health services at the hospital and community level.

Partner Institutions

	Department of Geriatric Services (formerly known as the National Center for Geriatric Health) of Jose R. Reyes Memorial Medical Center
	Institute for Aging of UP Manila
	Philippine College of Geriatric Medicine
	Philippine Health Insurance Corporation
	Department of Social Welfare and Development
	Coalition of Services of the Elderly
	Association of Department of Health Retired Employees

Policies and Laws

	Madrid International Plan of Action on Aging
	Regional Framework for Action on Aging and health in the Western Pacific 2014-2019
	The 1987 Philippine Constitution
	Aquino Health Agenda
	Philippine Plan of Action for Senior Citizens (2012-2016)
	Republic Act No. 9257 – “An Act Granting Additional Benefits and Privileges to Senior Citizens amending for the purpose of Republic Act no. 7432, otherwise known as “An Act to Maximize the Contribution of Senior Citizens to Nation Building, Grant benefits and Special Privileges and for Other Purposes”
	Republic Act No. 9994 – “An Act Granting Additional Benefits and Privileges to Senior Citizens, Further Amending Republic Act no. 7432”
Strategies, action Points and Timeline

	Participatory Governance for health through the life course
	Strengthened Service Delivery for older populations
	Advocacy and Promotion of healthy aging
	Evidence-based Decision Making

	BARANGAY NUTRITION SCHOLAR (BNS) PROGRAM
Description

The Barangay Nutrition Scholar (BNS) Program is a human resource development strategy of the Philippine Plan of Action for Nutrition, which involves the recruitment, training, deployment and supervision of volunteer workers or barangay nutrition scholars (BNS). Presidential Decree No. 1569 mandated the deployment of one BNS in every barangay in the country to monitor the nutritional status of children and/or link communities with nutrition and related service providers. PD 1569 also mandated the NNC to administer the program in cooperation with local government units.

Objectives

To be able to deliver nutrition and nutrition-related services to the barangay by caring for the malnourished and the nutritionally vulnerable, mobilizing the community, and linkage building
Program Components

		Recruitment: A BNS is a trained community worker who links the community with service providers, with the following qualifications:
		bonafide resident of the barangay for at least four years and can speak the local language well;
		possess leadership potentials as evidenced by membership and leadership in community organizations;
	willing to serve the barangay, part-time or full-time for at least one year;
		at least elementary school graduate but preferably has reached high school level;
	physically and mentally fit;
	more than 18 years old, but younger than 60 years old.
		Training: Ideally, ten-day didactic training and a 20-day practicum. However, due to resource constraints this has become various forms, e.g. orientation and on-the- job training, or 5-day didactic training
	Benefits:
	Monthly travelling allowance
		Entitled to second grade Civil Service Commission (CSC) eligibility after completing two years of continuous and satisfactory service
	Others, e.g. BNS kit consisting of a bag and other materials related to performing tasks, e.g. forms; medical assistance and survivorship assistance
Target Population/ Client

Children 0-5 years old Pregnant and lactating women
Families with 0-5 years old children and those with pregnant and lactating women

Area of Coverage

Nationwide

Partner Institutions Local Government Units Policies and Laws

		Presidential Decree No. 1569, “Strengthening the Barangay Nutrition Program by providing for a barangay nutrition scholar in every barangay, providing funds therefore, and for other purposes”
		NNC Memorandum No. 2017-011, “Guidelines for providing medical and survivorship assistance to Barangay Nutrition Scholars (BNS)”
Strategies, Action Points and Timeline

	Capacity building of local government units along providing technical and administrative support to BNS.
	Annual evaluation of performance of BNSs
	Active pursuit of the amendment of PD 1569 by end of the 17th Congress
	Revision of Guidelines on the Barangay Nutrition Scholars Program by end of December 2017

	BREAST CANCER MEDICINES ACCESS PROGRAM (BCMAP)

Help improve the cure and survival rates of cancer patients and alleviate their financial hardships in paying for costly cancer treatment, DOH will target the most cost-effective and commonly used adjuvant chemotherapy for Stage I-IIIb breast cancer in women. The free medicines access program for cancer is not only meant to provide ready access to cancer medicines but to promote early-screening and cancer awareness among Filipinos emphasizing that detecting, treating and managing cancer in the early stages improves the overall prognosis and survival rates for patients.

	UNANG YAKAP (ESSENTIAL NEWBORN CARE: PROTOCOL FOR NEW LIFE)

Unang Yakap: Essential Newborn Care (ENC)

Many initiatives, globally and locally, help save lives of pregnant women and children. Essential Newborn Care (ENC) is one.
ENC is a simple cost-effective newborn care intervention that can improve neonatal as well as maternal care. IT is an evidence-based intervention that
	emphasizes a core sequence of actions, performed methodically (step -by-step);
	is organized so that essential time bound interventions are not interrupted; and
	fills a gap for a package of bundled interventions in a guideline format.
	RURAL HEALTH MIDWIVES PLACEMENT PROGRAM (RHMPP) / MIDWIFERY SCHOLARSHIP PROGRAM OF THE PHILIPPINES (MSPP)

Rationale:

The Philippines’ maternal and infant morbidity and mortality rates have been marked despite its efforts to assist local government units for the past decade. An important factor identified was the lack of trained healthcare providers particularly, in the far flung areas of the country. This hinders the recognition of basic obstetric needs and delivery of quality health service to the community.

To intensify the country’s capacity in the provision of quality health service to the people, the Department of Health (DOH) has adopted the facility-based basic emergency obstetric care strategy. The midwives, being the frontline healthcare providers, have been identified by the DOH to serve as the link between health service delivery and the community in the reduction of maternal and neonatal morbidity and mortality.

The RHMPP aims to provide competent midwives to areas that have not performed well in terms of facility-based deliveries, fully immunized child and contraceptive prevalence rates, hence, improve facility-based health services. By augmenting health staff to selected government units, the DOH may improve maternal and child health and attain the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs).

In order to ensure a constant supply of competent midwives and to deliver their services to the people in dire need, the DOH created the MSPP that aims to produce competent midwives from qualified residents of priority areas.
Program Description:

The World Health Organization (WHO) affirms that approximately 15% of all pregnant women develop a potentially life-threatening complication that calls for either skilled care or major obstetrical interventions to survive. Readily accessible Emergency Obstetric Care may thus reduce maternal and perinatal morbidity and mortality.
The DOH is restating its commitment towards a health nation through more aggressive safe motherhood initiatives, hence, the upgrading of obstetric deliveries to strategic facility-based Basic Emergency Obstetric Care (BEmONC), where these facilities are manned by a team composed of a licensed physician, public health nurse, and a rural health midwife at the primary level.

Since the rural health midwives are considered as the frontline health workers in the rural areas and have progressed to become multi-task personnel in the delivery of healthcare services, amidst migration of other healthcare professionals, the DOH created the Rural Health Midwife Placement Program (RHMPP) to address the inequitable distribution of midwives and equip them for facility-based BEmONC practice. In support to the RHMPP, thus, ensure constant supply of competent midwives, the DOH created the Midwifery Scholarship Program of the Philippines (MSPP).

Career Track/ Return Service Obligation

Upon completion of the MSPP and obtaining the midwife’s Certificate of Registration and license, the scholars shall render two (2) years of service to the DOH for every year of scholarship granted as form of return service.
Expected Output:

The MSPP aims to produce and ensure constant supply of competent midwives who are ready to serve the DOH identified priority areas of the country.
The RHMPP addresses the inequitable distribution of midwives and equip them for facility-based BEmONC practice. Likewise, it provides competent midwives to areas that have not performed well in terms of facility-based deliveries, fully immunized child and contraceptive prevalence rates, hence, improve facility-based health services. The DOH ultimately aims in the attainment of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs).

Program Status:

For the MSPP, a hundred scholars are currently pursuing the Midwifery Course. On April of this year, 11 scholars graduated and passed the Board Examination by the Professional Regulation Commission (PRC). These scholars were deployed to DOH identified priority areas starting July 2011. This coming November, 37 other scholars will take the Board Examination.

For the RHMPP, 23 Registered Midwives were already deployed for the first batch (2008- 2010). In addition to that, 175 Registered Midwives (batch 2, 2010-2012) and 11 scholars (batch 3, 2011-2013) are currently being deployed in the DOH (BEmONC/CCT) identified priority areas.
	NATIONAL FAMILY PLANNING PROGRAM

Vision

For Filipino women and men achieve their desired family size and fulfill the reproductive health and rights for all through universal access to quality family planning information and services.
Mission

In line with the Department of Health FOURmula One Plus strategy and Universal Health Care framework, the National Family Planning Program is committed to provide responsive policy direction and ensure access of Filipinos to medically safe, legal, non- abortifacient, effective, and culturally acceptable modern family planning (FP) methods.
Objectives

		To increase modern Contraceptive Prevalence Rate (mCPR) among all women from 24.9% in 2017 to 30% by 2022
		To reduce the unmet need for modern family planning from 10.8% in 2017 to 8% by 2022

Program Components

Component A: Provision of free FP Commodities that are medically safe, legal, non- abortifacient, effective and culturally acceptable to all in need of the FP service:
	Forecasting of FP commodity requirements for the country
	Procurement of FP commodities and its ancillary supplies
	Strengthening of the supply chain management in FP and ensuring of adequate FP supply at the service delivery points
Component B: Demand Generation through Community-based Management Information System:
	Identification and profiling of current FP users and identification of potential FP clients and those with unmet need for FP (permanent or temporary methods)
	Mainstreaming FP in the regions with high unmet need for FP
	Development and dissemination of Information, Education Communication materials
	Advocacy and social mobilization for FP
Component C: Family Planning in Hospitals and other Health Facilities

	Establishment of FP service package in hospitals
	Organization of FP Itinerant team for outreach missions
	Delivery of FP services by hospitals to the poor communities especially Geographically Isolated and Disadvantaged Areas (GIDAs):
	Provision of budget support to operations by the itinerant teams including logistics and medical supplies needed for voluntary surgical sterilization services
	FP services as part of medical and surgical missions of the hospital
	Partnership with LGU hospitals for the FP outreach missions
Component D: Financial Security in FP

	Strengthening PhilHealth benefit packages for F
	Expansion of PhilHealth coverage to include health centers providing No Scalpel Vasectomy and FP Itinerant Teams
	Expansion of Philhealth benefit package to include pills, injectables and IUD

	Social Marketing of contraceptives and FP services by the partner NGOs
	National Funding/Subsidy
Partner Institutions

	Local Government Units
	Civil Society Organizations
	Non-Government Organizations
	Private Sector
	Faith-based Organizations
	Development Partners
Policies and Laws

		Republic Act No. 10354: Responsible Parenthood and Reproductive Health Act of 2012 (RPRH Law)
		Executive Order No. 12, s. 2017: Attaining and Sustaining “Zero Unmet Need for Modern Family Planning” Through the Strict Implementation of the Responsible Parenthood and Reproductive Health Act, Providing Funds Therefor, and for other Purposes
		Administrative Order 2017-0005: Guidelines in Achieving Desired Family Size through Accelerated and Sustained Reduction in Unmet Need for Modern Family Planning Methods
		Administrative Order 2016-0005: National Policy on the Minimum Initial Service Package (MISP) for Sexual and Reproductive Health (SRH) in Emergencies and Disasters
		Administrative Order 2017-0002: Guidelines on the Certification of Free Standing Family Planning Clinics
		Department Order 2017-0345: Guidelines on the Forecasting, Procurement, Allocation and Distribution of Modern Family Planning Commodities
		Administrative Order 2015-0006: Inclusion of Progestin Subdermal Implant as One of the Modern Methods Recognized by the National Family Planning Program.
		Administrative Order 2014-0042: Guidelines on the Implementation of Mobile Outreach Services for Family Planning
		Department Memorandum 2015-0384: Establishment of the Family Planning Logistics Hotline

Strategies, Action Points and Timeline

Apart from the routine means of FP service delivery, the National Family Planning Program also employs the following main strategies to ensure universal access to FP:
		FP Outreach Mission – this maximizes opportunities where clients are and FP services are delivered down to the community level.

		FP in hospitals – this address missed opportunities where women especially those who recently gave birth are offered with appropriate FP services.
						Intensive Demand generation through house-to-house visits by the community	health	volunteers,	Family	Development Sessions, Usapan sessions, among others



Summary
The DOH is the first government agency in the country certified to have a department- wide ISO 9001. It aims to institutionalize the quality management system in the Department. The organization developed several programs that aims to protect all Filipinos, especially the poor, from the financial burden of accessing/availing preventive and curative healthcare services. It was establish to serve as the means to help the people pay for health services; and prioritize and accelerate the provision of health service to all Filipinos, especially the segment of the population who cannot afford these services. Also, DOH programs aims to improve access of all Filipinos to quality health facilities by building new or upgrading the capacity of existing public health facilities such as barangay health stations, rural health units/ health centers, LGU and DOH hospitals to help attain the public health related Millennium Development Goals, attend to traumatic injuries and other types of emergencies, and manage non-communicable diseases and their complications.

