
5588086358Module 4
Political-Legal Perspective
91471745490Sex, Gender and Culture











































	GENDER AND CONTEMPORARY PHILIPPINE SOCIETY 2020.MODULE 4	108 | P a g e
Sex, Gender and Culture











































	GENDER AND CONTEMPORARY PHILIPPINE SOCIETY 2020.MODULE 4	108 | P a g e
of the Philippine GAD Program
Page

The Legal and Right-Based
Framework
110
The Rights-Based Approach
Model
116
4.1 CEDAW and the Magna
Carta of Women and the Philippine GAD Program
120
4.2 Laws Protecting Socio-
Economic and Cultural Rights of Women and other Genders
128
4.3 Gender-Responsive
Political Laws

4.4 Criminal Laws on Gender-
Based Violence
132
4.4.1 Philippine Policy on Anti-
Sexual Harassment
134
4.5 The SOGIE Bill
146






GENDER AND CONTEMPORARY PHILIPPINE SOCIETY.2020
President Ramon Magsaysay State University

9147179278302	GENDER AND CONTEMPORARY PHILIPPINE SOCIETY 2020.MODULE 4	109 | P a g e
	GENDER AND CONTEMPORARY PHILIPPINE SOCIETY 2020.MODULE 4	109 | P a g e
7620099072GENDER AND CONTEMPORARY PHILIPPINE SOCIETY.2020
President Ramon Magsaysay State University

Module 4
Political-Legal
2764535738250GAD Program
GAD Program
12471391598124thePPerhsipleicptipveinoef

MODULE 4
POLITICAL-LEGAL PERSPECTIVE OF THE PHILIPPINE GAD PROGRAM


OVERVIEW OF THE LESSON
This subject is all about the various laws concerning gender issues in the Philippines. It elaborates a framework for understanding the GAD related laws based on the human rights perspective. It defines and classifies laws according to the rights being covered and how rights are affected by the various laws.


LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By studying this module, you are expected to:
		Explain the rationale for the study of the political and legal perspective of GAD and other relevant issues;
		Explain the framework for understanding the laws relevant to the corresponding rights addressed by the laws and policies of the government;
	Explain the rights-based approach;
	Discuss the nature and overview of the Philippine Magna Carta of Women
		Distinguish among the various laws covering social, economic, and cultural rights of women and other genders;
	Identify the gender-responsive political laws;
	Discuss the nature of criminal laws addressing gender issues;
	Discuss the rationale and provisions of the proposed SOGIE Bill



CONTENT
Introduction (2hours)
The Legal and Rights-Based Framework
Let us first understand the general basic legal framework in the following reading before we examine GAD related laws in particular.

914717914653All About Law

The knowledge of the law is presumed. The Civil Code provides that ignorance of the law excuses no one from compliance therewith (Article 3, Civil Code of the Philippines). Every responsible citizen must know and respect the sanctity of every law by faithfully observing them. It is also important that citizens know the provisions of the constitution because it is the paramount law of the land to which all other laws must conform.

Laws, generally refer to:
	A whole body or system of law
	Rule of conduct formulated and made obligatory by legitimate power of the state
	Body of laws that includes the Constitution, RAs, PDs, EOs, Presidential issuances (ordinance power), Jurisprudence, ordinances passed by Sanggunians of local government units.
Republic Acts also known as statutes are laws passed by the national legislature.
Presidential Decrees, Executive Orders and other Presidential Issuances are laws passed by the president in the exercise of his legislative power
The Hierarchy of Laws

















Figure 4.1. The hierarchy of laws

The figure above shows the hierarchy of laws. It shows that the Constitution is the highest law of the land to which all other laws conform. In case of conflict in the interpretation of laws as to which will prevail between ordinances and statutes, the latter will prevail. As to which will prevail between statutes, executive issuances, and

914717914653international law and the provisions of the constitution, the constitution will prevail. The former or its conflicting provisions will be declared void if they are contrary to the provisions on the constitution.

Statutes, generally

	An act of legislature (Philippine Commission, Phil. Legislature, Batasang Pambansa, or the present-day Congress), statutes are laws promulgated by people’s representatives in the Lower House and in the Senate. They reflect the will of the people at large.
Classification of statutes as to their effect on individuals and masses

	Public statutes– affect the public at large
		General statute– applies to the whole state and operates throughout the state alike upon all people or all of a class.
		Special statute– relates to particular person or things of a class or to a particular community, individual or thing.
	Local Law – operation is confined to a specific place or locality (e.g municipal ordinance)
	Private – applies only to a specific person or subject.

Classification of statutes as to the timeframe of their operation

	Permanent statute- one whose operation is not limited in duration but continues until repealed.
	Temporary statute- duration is for a limited period of time fixed in the statute itself or whose life ceases upon the happening of an event.
	E.g. statute answering to an emergency
Other classes of statutes
	Prospective or retroactive statute – according to application
	Declaratory, curative, mandatory, directory, substantive, remedial, penal statutes – according to operation
	According to form
	Affirmative
	Negative
Manner of referring to statutes

Statutes are called by many names. The name by which it is called depends on the nature of the legislative branch or the name of the law-making body.

	Public Acts – Phil Commission and Phil Legislature 1901- 1935
	Commonwealth Acts – 1936- 1946

	914717914653Republic Acts – Congress 1946- 1972, 1987 ~
	Batas Pambansa – Batasang Pambansa
	Identification of laws – serial number and/or title
Executive Issuances

These include the following:

Presidential Decrees or PD’s of Marcos during the period of martial law 1973 Constitution. These are laws issued by the chief executive in the exercise of his legislative powers as sanctioned by the 1973 Constitution
Executive Orders or EOs of Aquino revolutionary period Freedom Constitution Administrative Orders are also considered law issued by the President in aid of
his executive functions.

CONSTITUTION DEFINED

Constitution

The following define and describe the nature of Constitution:
	fundamental law which sets up a form of government and defines and delimits the powers thereof and those of its officers, reserving to the people themselves plenary sovereignty;
	written charter enacted and adopted by the people by which a government for them is established;
	permanent in nature thus it does not only apply to existing conditions but also to future needs;
	basically it is the fundamental laws for the governance and administration of a nation;
	absolute and unalterable except by amendments;
	all other laws are expected to conform to it.
Constitution Construed as Enduring for Ages

Constitution is a law designed to last for ages. It is not merely for a few years but it also needs to endure through a long lapse of time. It must be adaptable to various crisis of human affairs but it must also be solid permanent and substantial.

	It must be construed as a dynamic process intended to stand for a great length of time to be progressive and not static
FUNCTIONS OF THE CONSTITUTION

The functions of the constitution enumerated as follows are not exclusive:
		It governs the life of the people not only at the time of its framing but far into the indefinite future

		91471738353The express purpose of our Constitution: to protect and enhance the people’s interests
	Its stability protects the rights, liberty, and property of the people (rich or poor)

What a constitution is NOT:
	It should NOT change with emergencies or conditions
	It should NOT be inflexible
	It should NOT be interpreted narrowly
Words employed in writing the constitution should not be construed (interpreted) to yield fixed and rigid answers because its meaning is applied to meet new or changed conditions as they arise.

Courts should interpret/construe the constitution so that it would be consistent with reason, justice and the public interest and not only serving the benefit of only a chosen few.
CONSTITUTION AS THE HIGHEST LAW OF THE LAND

The Constitution is the highest law of the land to which all other laws should conform. This is owing to the authorship of the people of the Philippines of this sacred document.

In case of conflict between the Constitution and the statutes passed by Congress or the ordinances passed by the local legislatures or even the legislative issuance of the President, it is the constitution that prevails.

The Constitution also provides the ultimate basis for determining the validity of any treaty or international instruments entered into by the President.

INTERNATIONAL LAW

International law includes international agreements entered into by the members of the international community of nations or the United Nations. International law includes the following among others: Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women.


CLASSIFICATION OF LAW
TYPES OF LAW ACCORDING TO THE RIGHTS COVERED
The types of law according to the rights covered are as follows: Social
Economic Cultural Political

TYPES OF LAW ACCORDING TO HOW THE RIGHTS ARE AFFECTED
The types of law according to how the rights are affected are as follows: Civil
Political Administrative Criminal


CRIMINAL LAWS AS DISTINGNUISHED FROM OTHER LAWS
The laws mentioned above are equally important. However, we pay special attention to criminal law because of the following:
	The level of obligation it requires on the part of the government is the highest, that of protection;
	The potential impact on individual rights and freedoms of the accused as well as convicted persons is to deny them such as a form of penalty;
	The purpose for which they are enacted and enforced it to protect the rights of the victims.

Specific examples of gender-responsive criminal laws are discussed in Lesson 4.4 of this chapter. You must refer back to this section in examining the nature and substance of the cited criminal law in that section.


The framework of examining criminals laws include your understanding of the following elements as they are specifically and expressly provided in the law (you cannot, change, distort, add, or diminish what is clearly written in the law itself as they might greatly affect rights):
	Definition of the crime.
	What acts are prohibited
	Who are the parties involved
		Who are the accused as to the level of participation in the crime and what are their corresponding penalties?
	The effectivity of the penal law

You can use the following matrix in examining the criminal laws:

Why is the law considered Gender-
responsive
Effectivity of the law
Definition of the crime
Prohibited Acts
Accused as to level of participation
Penalty





















The Rights-Based Approach Model
Rationale for the Study of the Political-Legal Perspective of GAD
In the previous module, you have learned that there are gender issues in society because of inequality set by society and reinforced by culture upon men and women, girls, and boys, and recently, other genders, in terms of stereotyped characteristics, roles, and expectations. This inequality is cascaded to the statuses, and the extent of access to, control and enjoyment of resources, benefits, and opportunities of the members of society based on gender. Because of inequality rights of marginalized sectors tend to be violated.
The framework for studying this module is based on your understanding of what law is and its functions in terms of realization of human rights. Human rights are entitlements that are inherent and equal in all people because we are humans regardless of qualifications, conditions, or statuses. Human rights have standard characteristics of universality, equality, indivisibility, inalienability, duty and obligation. Reality and facts show that in many fields, areas, and concerns, women and other marginalized sectors experience inequality and discrimination. You have so far learned that gender issues or conditions and situations where there is inequality and that the government is duty-bound to address them through the implementation of the laws, policies, and programs. This is precisely why we are using this framework in examining gender related laws and policies.
Laws, generally refer to a whole body or system of law; or rule of conduct formulated and made obligatory by legitimate power of the state. Laws are classified in this module into four (4) kinds as to the kinds of rights they cover and the level of duty they assign to government as the duty bearer. So it is important that you know precisely what human rights (HR) are. The reading culled from the website of the United Nations will help you in this area.
917257130483From the UN Office of HR Commissioner:
“What are human rights?

Human rights are rights inherent to all human beings, whatever our nationality, place of residence, sex, national or ethnic origin, color, religion, language, or any other status. We are all equally entitled to our human rights without discrimination. These rights are all interrelated, interdependent and indivisible.

Universal human rights are often expressed and guaranteed by law, in the forms of treaties, customary international law, general principles and other sources of international law. International human rights law lays down obligations of
From the UN Office of HR Commissioner:
“What are human rights?

Human rights are rights inherent to all human beings, whatever our nationality, place of residence, sex, national or ethnic origin, color, religion, language, or any other status. We are all equally entitled to our human rights without discrimination. These rights are all interrelated, interdependent and indivisible.

Universal human rights are often expressed and guaranteed by law, in the forms of treaties, customary international law, general principles and other sources of international law. International human rights law lays down obligations of


Governments to act in certain ways or to refrain from certain acts, in order to promote and protect human rights and fundamental freedoms of individuals or groups.

Human rights treaties, reflecting consent of States which creates legal obligations for them and giving concrete expression to universality. Some fundamental human rights norms enjoy universal protection by customary international law across all boundaries and civilizations.

Human rights are inalienable. They should not be taken away, except in specific situations and according to due process. For example, the right to liberty may be restricted if a person is found guilty of a crime by a court of law.
Governments to act in certain ways or to refrain from certain acts, in order to promote and protect human rights and fundamental freedoms of individuals or groups.

Human rights treaties, reflecting consent of States which creates legal obligations for them and giving concrete expression to universality. Some fundamental human rights norms enjoy universal protection by customary international law across all boundaries and civilizations.

Human rights are inalienable. They should not be taken away, except in specific situations and according to due process. For example, the right to liberty may be restricted if a person is found guilty of a crime by a court of law.

917257256540Interdependent and indivisible

All human rights are indivisible, whether they are civil and political rights, such as the right to life, equality before the law and freedom of expression; economic, social and cultural rights, such as the rights to work, social security and education, or collective rights, such as the rights to development and self-determination, are indivisible, interrelated and interdependent. The improvement of one right facilitates advancement of the others. Likewise, the deprivation of one right adversely affects the others.

Equal and non-discriminatory

Non-discrimination is a cross-cutting principle in international human rights law. The principle is present in all the major human rights treaties and provides the central theme of some of international human rights conventions such as the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women.
Interdependent and indivisible

All human rights are indivisible, whether they are civil and political rights, such as the right to life, equality before the law and freedom of expression; economic, social and cultural rights, such as the rights to work, social security and education, or collective rights, such as the rights to development and self-determination, are indivisible, interrelated and interdependent. The improvement of one right facilitates advancement of the others. Likewise, the deprivation of one right adversely affects the others.

Equal and non-discriminatory

Non-discrimination is a cross-cutting principle in international human rights law. The principle is present in all the major human rights treaties and provides the central theme of some of international human rights conventions such as the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women.


At this point, you must know the following general principles of human rights:
	Nature: Aspirations & Entitlements
	Parties: Right-holder & Duty-bearer
	State obligations: Respect, Fulfill and Protect

As to state duties and obligations, the government as the duty-bearer, observes the following levels, lowest being Respect and highest is to protect.
	Respect (government should be neutral);
	Fulfil (provision of the needs or rights); and
	Protect (police power is used).

As to why gender issues are human rights issues, the following holds true:


	The basic inequality between genders as to access to power, resources, benefits, opportunities is a violation of the HR principle of non-discrimination, equality and universality
	The violation of the various rights of women, other genders that affect their status is a basic gap in the performance of the functions of duty-bearers, namely the government and its units.

Undoubtedly, human societies strive to respect, provide and protect human rights because of the following goals for the marginalized:
	Non-Discrimination
	Empowerment
	Equality
	Equity
	Human Dignity

The processes of achieving realization of human rights involve the following:
	Accountability
	Good Governance
	Independence of Judiciary
	Legislative Capacity
	People’s Participation
	Transparency
914717277486HUMAN RIGHTS CONCEPTS
Human Dignity
	each individual regardless of status deserves to be honoured and esteemed Empowerment
	power to act for and on one's own behalf to claim one's rights;
	emphasizes efforts of people themselves to bring about necessary changes towards the full realization of all human rights, including that which comes with the acquisition of critical analysis of one's situation.
Equality
	human rights are enjoyed by all on an equal basis, where women and men should equally exercise all their human rights and equally enjoy their fruits.

Equity

does not mean identical treatment at all times.
characterized by fairness, justice and impartiality
HUMAN RIGHTS CONCEPTS
Human Dignity
	each individual regardless of status deserves to be honoured and esteemed Empowerment
	power to act for and on one's own behalf to claim one's rights;
	emphasizes efforts of people themselves to bring about necessary changes towards the full realization of all human rights, including that which comes with the acquisition of critical analysis of one's situation.
Equality
	human rights are enjoyed by all on an equal basis, where women and men should equally exercise all their human rights and equally enjoy their fruits.

Equity

does not mean identical treatment at all times.
characterized by fairness, justice and impartiality


	914717914653being fair is to use strategies and measures to compensate for ongoing, historical, and social disadvantages that prevent certain groups from otherwise operating on a level playing field.
	towards achievement of equality. Non-discrimination
	all are entitled to human rights and to enjoy the fruits of development without distinction of any kind, exclusion, restriction or preference based on any of the following: race, color, gender, age, language, disability, political or other opinion, nationality or other social origin, property, birth, or other status.
	Non-discrimination
	indirect discrimination occurs when a law, policy or programme does not appear to be discriminatory, but has a discriminatory effect when implemented.
Attention to Vulnerable Groups
	recognizes the fact that there are certain groups in society, compared to the general population, which are most prone to and defenceless against abuses or violations of their human rights by reason of their contexts rooted in cultural and social inequities.
Indivisibility
	entitlement to a totality of things
	rights have no hierarchy
	denial of one right invariably impedes enjoyment of other rights Interrelatedness/
Interdependence
	efforts must ensure that all human rights are realized in an integrated manner Universality
	Human rights belong to everyone, everywhere, since they are inherent and inalienable to being human.
Transparency
	to see openly into all activities of government
	government must ensure full, free and public disclosure of all its decisions, policies, rules, etc.
	information disclosed to the public must be complete and of high quality, in easily understandable forms, timely, freely available and directly accessible to all
Accountability
	answerable to those it governs and responsible for all its decisions and actions
	violations of human rights may come in the form of direct action, inaction or omission on the part of the State to respect, protect or fulfill the right or other adjudicator
	Accountability
	proceedings for appropriate redress before competent court or other adjudicator
	the capacities needed by the rights-holders to assert and claim their rights
	Accountability
	policy formulation must clearly determine the human right to be addressed, what must be done, what is the standard, who is accountable and what are the

91471738353remedies made available, as well as the availability of needed capacities or resources to build lacking capacities
Participation
	informed participation
	autonomy as an organization respected and protected at all times
	opportunities for people to be capacitated and empowered
	Participation
	voluntary, recognized by law, free, and active
	raise the critical consciousness of the individual
	must include participation in decision making processes. Good Governance
	creation of an enabling environment that is conducive for the enjoyment of all human rights and its fruits, characterized by participatory, consensus-oriented, accountable, transparent, responsive, effective and efficient, equitable and inclusive governance, and following the laws
Good Governance
	involves a process whereby societies or organizations make their important decisions, determine whom they involve in the process and how they render account
	true test of governance is the degree to which it delivers on its promise of human rights.
Legislative Capacity
	Human rights standard must be guaranteed by law
	the State cannot use any of its domestic processes to evade any of the obligations, hence legislature must enact laws to repeal discriminatory laws or those laws that are in contravention of or impedes State compliance with human rights.
Independence of the Judiciary
		the judiciary should decide on all matters before it impartially, on the basis of fact, in accordance with law, without improper influence or pressure.





	CEDAW AND THE MAGNA CARTA OF WOMEN AND THE PHILIPPINE GAD
PROGRAM (2hours)


In this lesson, two types of laws are involved: International and National law. They are bundled together because as far as our legal system is concerned, they are treated on the same level as to enforceability. Many have the misconception that because international laws and conventions are issued by international bodies, they must automatically be regarded as a higher and more powerful kind of law and that they are even more superior to our constitution. This is wrong! The hierarchy of laws principle

applies in all classes of laws: The constitution is the highest law of the land to which ALL other laws conform.


The constitution provides the following regarding international law (here CEDAW and other treaties and conventions are covered):.The President has the power to sign and enter into treaties and conventions…But those must be ratified by the Senate to become part of the law of the land. Without such ratification, international treaties, agreements and conventions have no force and effect within our territory. This is because our country is sovereign, meaning independent and beyond the control of other countries and international entities, not even the United Nations, unless it expressly (through ratification by the legislature) allows itself to be controlled.


The UN Convention of the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women or CEDAW was agreed upon by the members of the UN last. The Philippine Senate ratified it on. At the point of ratification, CEDAW took effect as a framework and guide for the issuance of law concerning women and government became duty-bound to observe its provisions in all its succeeding legislations and policy issuances and implementation.


At this point, read and understand carefully the provisions of CEDAW in the following reading:
917257105132Specific Purpose of CEDAW:
	elimination of all forms of discrimination against women
	guarantee of basic human rights and fundamental freedoms Three CEDAW Principles:
Substantive Equality
	equality for women in all spheres on the basis of equality with men
	de jure & de facto equality
	in terms of treatment, access and opportunity, as well as in results

Substantive Equality
	Is achieved through:
	through the rule of law
	adoption of appropriate measures to promote women's actual enjoyment or a right or benefit
	temporary special measure

Non-discrimination
	Any distinction, exclusion or restriction made on the basis of sex which has the EFFECT or PURPOSE of impairing or nullifying the recognition, enjoyment or exercise by women, irrespective of their marital status, on the basis of equality
Specific Purpose of CEDAW:
	elimination of all forms of discrimination against women
	guarantee of basic human rights and fundamental freedoms Three CEDAW Principles:
Substantive Equality
	equality for women in all spheres on the basis of equality with men
	de jure & de facto equality
	in terms of treatment, access and opportunity, as well as in results

Substantive Equality
	Is achieved through:
	through the rule of law
	adoption of appropriate measures to promote women's actual enjoyment or a right or benefit
	temporary special measure

Non-discrimination
	Any distinction, exclusion or restriction made on the basis of sex which has the EFFECT or PURPOSE of impairing or nullifying the recognition, enjoyment or exercise by women, irrespective of their marital status, on the basis of equality


91471738353of men and women of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the political, economic, social, cultural or civil or nay other field
Types of discrimination
	Direct Discrimination
		Indirect Discrimination: gender-neutrality in laws and policies may continuity past discrimination. They may be modelled on male lifestyles and fail into account aspects of women's life experiences which may differ from those of men. Differences may result from stereotypical expectations, attitudes and behavior.
Gender-based Violence
	Violence directed to a woman because she is a woman
	impairs women's rights to:
	life
	against torture or to cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment
	equality in the family
	highest standard of physical and mental health
State Obligation
	Obligation to respect, protect and fulfil
	Obligations of conduct and result
	Obligations to progressively realize to the maximum of available resources
	Obligation to eliminate discrimination in all its forms to ensure women's advancement


The Philippine Magna Carta of Women

The Magna Carta of Women is comprehensive women’s human rights law that seeks to eliminate discrimination against women by recognizing, protecting, fulfilling and promoting the rights of Filipino women, especially those in marginalized sector.

The following primer on the Magna Carta of Women was culled from the website of the Philippine Statistical Authority (2020)
917257180962What is discrimination against women?

The Magna Carta of Women defines discrimination against women as:

	any gender-based distinction, exclusion, or restriction which has the effect or purpose of impairing or nullifying the recognition, enjoyment, or exercise by women, irrespective of their marital status, on a basis of equality of men and women, of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the political, economic, social, cultural, civil or any other field;

	any act or omission, including by law, policy, administrative measure, or practice, that directly or indirectly excludes or restricts women in the recognition and promotion of their rights and their access to and enjoyment of opportunities, benefits, or privileges;
What is discrimination against women?

The Magna Carta of Women defines discrimination against women as:

	any gender-based distinction, exclusion, or restriction which has the effect or purpose of impairing or nullifying the recognition, enjoyment, or exercise by women, irrespective of their marital status, on a basis of equality of men and women, of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the political, economic, social, cultural, civil or any other field;

	any act or omission, including by law, policy, administrative measure, or practice, that directly or indirectly excludes or restricts women in the recognition and promotion of their rights and their access to and enjoyment of opportunities, benefits, or privileges;


	914717914653a measure or practice of general application that fails to provide for mechanisms to offset or address sex or gender-based disadvantages or limitations of women, as a result of which women are denied or restricted in the recognition and protection of their rights and in their access to and enjoyment of opportunities, benefits, or privileges; or women, more than men are shown to have suffered the greater adverse effects of those measures or practices; and

	discrimination compounded by or intersecting with other grounds, status, or condition, such as ethnicity, age, poverty, or religion.

What are the rights of women guaranteed under the Magna Carta of Women?

All rights in the Philippine Constitution and those rights recognized under international instruments duly signed and ratified by the Philippines, in consonance with Philippine laws shall be rights of women under the Magna Carta of Women. These rights shall be enjoyed without discrimination since the law prohibits discrimination against women, whether done by public and private entities or individuals.



The Magna Carta of Women also spells out every woman's right to:

	Protection from all forms of violence, including those committed by the State. This includes the incremental increase in the recruitment and training of women in government services that cater to women victims of gender-related offenses. It also ensures mandatory training on human rights and gender sensitivity to all government personnel involved in the protection and defense of women against gender-based violence, and mandates local government units to establish a Violence Against Women Desk in every barangay to address violence against women cases;

	Protection and security in times of disaster, calamities and other crisis situations, especially in all phases of relief, recovery, rehabilitation and construction efforts, including protection from sexual exploitation and other sexual and gender-based violence.

	Participation and representation, including undertaking temporary special measures and affirmative actions to accelerate and ensure women's equitable participation and representation in the third level civil service, development councils and planning bodies, as well as political parties and international bodies, including the private sector.

	Equal treatment before the law, including the State's review and when necessary amendment or repeal of existing laws that are discriminatory to women;
	Equal access and elimination of discrimination against women in education, scholarships and training. This includes revising educational materials and curricula to remove  gender  stereotypes and  images,  and  outlawing  the  expulsion,  non-

914717914653readmission, prohibiting enrollment and other related discrimination against women students and faculty due to pregnancy outside of marriage;

	Equal participation in sports. This includes measures to ensure that gender-based discrimination in competitive and non-competitive sports is removed so that women and girls can benefit from sports development;

	Non-discrimination in employment in the field of military, police and other similar services. This includes according the same promotional privileges and opportunities as their men counterpart, including pay increases, additional benefits, and awards, based on competency and quality of performance. The dignity of women in the military, police and other similar services shall always be respected, they shall be accorded with the same capacity as men to act in and enter into contracts, including marriage, as well as be entitled to leave benefits for women such as maternity leave, as provided for in existing laws;

	Non-discriminatory and non-derogatory portrayal of women in media and film to raise the consciousness of the general public in recognizing the dignity of women and the role and contribution of women in family, community, and the society through the strategic use of mass media;

									Comprehensive health services and health information and education covering all stages of a woman's life cycle, and which addresses the major causes of women's mortality	and	morbidity, including	access	to	among	others,	maternal	care, responsible, ethical, legal, safe and effective methods of family planning, and encouraging healthy lifestyle activities to prevent diseases;

	Leave benefits of two (2) months with full pay based on gross monthly compensation, for women employees who undergo surgery caused by gynecological disorders, provided that they have rendered continuous aggregate employment service of at least six (6) months for the last twelve (12) months;

	Equal rights in all matters relating to marriage and family relations. The State shall ensure the same rights of women and men to: enter into and leave marriages, freely choose a spouse, decide on the number and spacing of their children, enjoy personal rights including the choice of a profession, own, acquire, and administer their property, and acquire, change, or retain their nationality. It also states that the betrothal and marriage of a child shall have no legal effect. The Magna Carta of Women also guarantees the civil, political and economic rights of women in the marginalized sectors, particularly their right to:

	Food security and resources for food production, including equal rights in the titling of the land and issuance of stewardship contracts and patents;

	Localized, accessible, secure and affordable housing;

	914717914653Employment, livelihood, credit, capital and technology;

	Skills training, scholarships, especially in research and development aimed towards women friendly farm technology;

	Representation and participation in policy-making or decision-making bodies in the regional, national, and international levels;

	Access to information regarding policies on women, including programs, projects and funding outlays that affect them;

	Social protection;

	Recognition and preservation of cultural identity and integrity provided that these cultural systems and practices are not discriminatory to women;

	Inclusion in discussions on peace and development;
	Services and interventions for women in especially difficult circumstances or WEDC;

	Protection of girl-children against all forms of discrimination in education, health and nutrition, and skills development; and

	Protection of women senior citizens.

The Magna Carta of Women defines the marginalized sectors as those who belong to the basic, disadvantaged, or vulnerable groups who are mostly living in poverty and have little or no access to land and other resources, basic social and economic services such as health care, education, water and sanitation, employment and livelihood opportunities, housing security, physical infrastructure and the justice system. These include, but are not limited to women in the following sectors or groups: Small farmers and rural workers, Fisher folk, Urban poor, Workers in the formal economy, Workers in the informal economy, Migrant workers, Indigenous Peoples, Moro, Children, Senior citizens, Persons with disabilities, and Solo parents.

How can Filipino women living abroad benefit from this law?

Statistics show that more and more Filipino women are migrating for overseas employment. In many places, women migrant workers have limited legal protections or access to information about their rights, rendering them vulnerable to gender-specific discrimination, exploitation and abuse. Section 37 of the Magna Carta of Women mandates the designation of a gender focal point in the consular section of Philippine embassies or consulates. The said officer who shall be trained on Gender and Development shall be primarily responsible in handling gender concerns of women migrant workers, especially those in distress. Other agencies (e.g. the Department of

914717914653Labor and Employment and the Department of Social Welfare and Development) are also mandated to cooperate in strengthening the Philippine foreign posts' programs for the delivery of services to women migrant workers, consistent with the one-country team approach in Foreign Service.

Who will be responsible for implementing the Magna Carta of Women?

The State, the private sector, society in general, and all individuals shall contribute to the recognition, respect and promotion of the rights of women defined and guaranteed in the Magna Carta of Women. The Philippine Government shall be the primary duty- bearer in implementing the said law. This means that all government offices, including local government units and government-owned and controlled corporations shall be responsible to implement the provisions of Magna Carta of Women that falls within their mandate, particularly those that guarantee rights of women that require specific action from the State. As the primary duty-bearer, the Government is tasked to:

	refrain from discriminating against women and violating their rights;
	protect women against discrimination and from violation of their rights by private corporations, entities, and individuals;
	promote and fulfill the rights of women in all spheres, including their rights to substantive equality and non-discrimination.

The Government shall fulfill these duties through the development and implementation of laws, policies, regulatory instruments, administrative guidelines, and other appropriate measures, including temporary special measures. It shall also establish mechanisms to promote the coherent and integrated implementation of the Magna Carta of Women and other related laws and policies to effectively stop discrimination against Filipino women.

What are the specific responsibilities of government under the Magna Carta of Women?
The Magna Carta of Women mandates all government offices, including government- owned and controlled corporations and local government units to adopt gender mainstreaming as a strategy for implementing the law and attaining its objectives. It also mandates (a) planning, budgeting, monitoring and evaluation for gender and development, (b) the creation and/or strengthening of gender and development focal points, and (c) the generation and maintenance of gender statistics and sex- disaggregated databases to aid in planning, programming and policy formulation.

Under this law, the National Commission on the Role of Filipino Women which will be renamed as the Philippine Commission on Women (PCW) shall be the overall monitoring and oversight body to ensure the implementation of the law. As an agency under the Office of the President of the Philippines, it will be the primary policy-making and coordinating body for women and gender equality concerns and shall lead in ensuring that government agencies are capacitated on the effective implementation of the Magna Carta of Women.

914717914653
Consistent with its mandate, the Commission on Human Rights shall act as the Gender and Development Ombud to ensure the promotion and protection of women's human rights. The Commission on Audit shall conduct an annual audit on the government offices' use of their gender and development budgets for the purpose of determining its judicious use and the efficiency, and effectiveness of interventions in addressing gender issues. Local government units are also encouraged to develop and pass a gender and development code to address the issues and concerns of women in their respective localities based on consultation with their women constituents.

What are the penalties of violators?
If the violation is committed by a government agency or any government office, including government-owned and controlled corporations and local government units, the person directly responsible for the violation, as well as the head of the agency or local chief executive shall be held liable under the Magna Carta of Women. The sanctions under administrative law, civil service or other appropriate laws shall be recommended by the Commission on Human Rights to the Civil Service Commission and the Department of the Interior and Local Government.

Further, in cases where violence has been proven to be perpetrated by agents of the State, such shall be considered aggravating offenses with corresponding penalties depending on the severity of the offenses.

If the violation is committed by a private entity or individual, the person directly responsible for the violation shall be liable to pay damages. Further, the offended party can also pursue other remedies available under the law and can invoke any of the other provisions of existing laws, especially those that protect the rights of women.

How will the implementation of the Magna Carta of Women be funded?
The Magna Carta of Women provides that the State agencies should utilize their gender and development budgets for programs and activities to implement its provisions. Funds necessary for the implementation of the Magna Carta of Women shall be charged against the current appropriations of the concerned agencies, and shall be included in their annual budgets for the succeeding years.

The Magna Carta of Women also mandates the State to prioritize allocation of all available resources to effectively fulfill its obligations under the said law.

When is the effectivity of the Magna Carta of Women?
The Magna Carta of Women shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in at least two (2) newspapers of general circulation.

Who will formulate the Implementing Rules and Regulations?
The Philippine Commission on Women, in coordination with the Commission on Human Rights and all concerned departments and agencies including, as observers, both Houses of Congress, and with the participation of representatives from non-

government organizations and civil society groups shall formulate the implementing rules and regulations of the Magna Carta of Women within one hundred eighty (180) days after its effectivity.
government organizations and civil society groups shall formulate the implementing rules and regulations of the Magna Carta of Women within one hundred eighty (180) days after its effectivity.





	LAWS PROTECTING SOCIO-ECONOMIC AND CULTURAL RIGHTS OF WOMEN AND OTHER GENDERS (4 hours)
Economic, social, and cultural rights include the human right to work, the right to an adequate standard of living, including food, clothing, and housing, the right to physical and mental health, the right to social security, the right to a healthy environment, and the right to education.
Social rights include the rights to an adequate standard of living, affordable housing, food, education, an equitable health system, and social security based on respect, not sanctions. There is evidence that they improve the lives of individuals and communities.
They are rights related to themes such as language; cultural and artistic production; participation in cultural life; cultural heritage; intellectual property rights; author's rights; minorities and access to culture, among others.


The matrix below may be used to analyze laws that cover socio-economic, and cultural rights:

Law
Date of Effectivity
Why is this law considered a GAD-responsive law
Rights Covered
Intended Effect of the Law



Economic
Social
Cultural









The following is a list of laws that cover socio-economic and political rights of women. Search for the full text and discussion of the laws and use the matrix above to analyze at least three (3) of them.
917257105469	Republic Act 9729: Climate Change Act of 2009

October 29, 2009

It is the policy of the State to afford full protection and the advancement of the right of the people to a healthful ecology in accord with the rhythm and harmony of nature. In this light, the State has adopted the Philippine Agenda 21 framework which espouses sustainable development, to fulfill human needs
	Republic Act 9729: Climate Change Act of 2009

October 29, 2009

It is the policy of the State to afford full protection and the advancement of the right of the people to a healthful ecology in accord with the rhythm and harmony of nature. In this light, the State has adopted the Philippine Agenda 21 framework which espouses sustainable development, to fulfill human needs


914717914653while maintaining the quality of the natural environment for current and future generations.

	Republic Act 9710: Magna Carta of Women

August 14, 2009

The Magna Carta of Women (MCW) is a comprehensive women’s human rights law that seeks to eliminate discrimination through the recognition, protection, fulfillment, and promotion of the rights of Filipino women, especially those belonging in the marginalized sectors of the society. It conveys a framework of rights for women based directly on international law.

	Republic Act 9501: Magna Carta for Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises

May 23, 2008

An act to promote entrepreneurship by strengthening development and assistance programs to micro, small and medium scale enterprises, amending for the purpose republic act no. 6977, as amended, otherwise known as the “Magna Carta For Small Enterprises” and for other purposes

	Republic Act 8980: Early Childhood Care and Development Act

December 5, 2002

It is hereby declared the policy of the State to promote the rights of children to survival, development and special protection with full recognition of the nature of childhood and its special needs; and to support parents in their roles as primary caregivers and as their children’s first teachers. The State shall institutionalize a National System for Early Childhood Care and Development (ECCD) that is comprehensive, integrative and sustainable, that involves multi- sectoral and inter-agency collaboration at the national and local levels among government; among service providers, families and communities; and among the public and private sectors, non-government organizations, professional associations, …

	Republic Act 9178: Barangay Micro Business Enterprises Act of 2002

November 13, 2002

Section 1. Short Title – This Act shall be known as the “Barangay Micro Business Enterprises (BMBE’s) Act of 2002.”

	Republic Act 8972: Solo Parents’ Welfare Act of 2000

914717914653November 7, 2000

It is the policy of the State to promote the family as the foundation of the nation, strengthen its solidarity and ensure its total development. Towards this end, it shall develop a comprehensive program of services for solo parents and their children to be carried out by the Department of Social Welfare and Development (DSWD), the Department of Health (DOH), the Department of Education, Culture and Sports (DECS), the Department of the Interior and Local Government (DILG), the Commission on Higher Education (CHED), the Technical Education and Skills Development Authority (TESDA), the National Housing Authority (NHA), the Department of Labor …

	Republic Act 8760: General Appropriations Act of 2000

February 16, 2000

In consultation with the National Commission on the Role of Filipino Women (NCRFW), all departments including their attached agencies, offices, bureaus, agencies, state universities and colleges, government-owned and controlled corporations and other instrumentalities, shall formulate a GAD Plan, designed to empower women and address gender issues, in accordance with R.A. 7192 and the Philippine Plan for Gender-Responsive Development (PPGD), 1995- 2025. The cost of implementation of the GAD Plan shall be at least five percent (5%) of the agency’s total FY 2000 budget appropriations.

	Republic Act 8745: General Appropriations Act of 1999

December 30, 1998

Programs/Projects Related to Gender and Development (GAD) – The National Economic and Development Authority (NEDA) and the Department of Budget and Management (DBM), in consultation with the National Commission on the Role of Filipino Women (NCRFW), shall formulate a set of guidelines for the implementation of programs/projects related to GAD.

	Republic Act 8425: Social Reform and Poverty Alleviation Act

June 30, 1998

Adopt an area-based, sectoral and focused intervention to poverty alleviation wherein every poor Filipino family shall be empowered to meet its minimum basic needs of health, food and nutrition, water and environmental sanitation, income security, shelter and decent housing, peace and order, education and functional literacy, participation in governance, and family care and psycho- social integrity;

	914717914653Republic Act 8424: The Tax Reform Act of 1997

February 25, 1998

An income tax is hereby imposed: (a) On the taxable income defined in Section 31 of this Code, other than income subject to tax under Subsections (B), (C) and
(D) of this Section, derived for each taxable year from all sources within and without the Philippines be every individual citizen of the Philippines residing therein;



	Republic Act 10398: An Act Declaring November Twenty-Five Of Every Year As “National Consciousness Day For The Elimination Of Violence Against Women And Children”

March 19, 2013

Heads of government agencies and instrumentalities, government-owned and - controlled corporations, local government units and employers in the private sector shall, together with their employees, organize, engage or participate in activities designed to raise public awareness on the problem of violence, and the elimination of all forms of violence, against women and children.

	Republic Act No. 10361: Domestic Workers Act or Batas Kasambahay

January 18, 2013

The State strongly affirms labor as a primary social force and is committed to respect, promote, protect and realize the fundamental principles and rights at work including, but not limited to, abolition of child labor, elimination of all forms of forced labor, discrimination in employment and occupation, and trafficking in persons, especially women and children

	Republic Act 10354: The Responsible Parenthood and Reproductive Health Act of 2012

December 21, 2012

This Act shall be known as “The Responsible Parenthood and Reproductive Health Act of 2012″. The State recognizes and guarantees the human rights of all persons including their right to equality and nondiscrimination of these rights, the right to sustainable human development, the right to health which includes reproductive health, the right to education and information, and the right to

91471738353choose and make decisions for themselves in accordance with their religious convictions, ethics, cultural beliefs, and the demands of responsible parenthood.

	Republic Act No. 10174: An Act establishing the people’s survival fund to provide long-term finance streams to enable the government to effectively address the problem of Climate Change

August 16, 2012

“SEC. 2. Declaration of Policy. – It is the policy of the State to afford full protection and the advancement of the right of the people to a healthful ecology in accord with the rhythm and harmony of nature. In this light, the State has adopted the Philippine Agenda 21 framework which espouses sustainable development, to fulfill human needs while maintaining the quality of the natural environment for current and future generations.

	Republic Act 10121: Philippine Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Act of 2010

May 27, 2010

An act strengthening the Philippine disaster risk reduction and management system, providing for the national disaster risk reduction and management framework and institutionalizing the national disaster risk reduction and management plan, appropriating funds therefor and for other purposes.




	GENDER-RESPONSIVE POLITICAL LAWS (1 hour)






	CRIMINAL LAWS ON GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE (5 hours)
The penal code which was passed in and took effect on, is a compilation of criminal laws which affect all in general. However, the following laws are passed by congress to address gender issues not specifically covered by the Penal /code:
917257105085	Republic Act 11313: Safe Spaces Act
	Republic Act 11313: Safe Spaces Act


914717914653April 17, 2018

Republic Act 11313: Safe Spaces Act Republic of the Philippines Congress of the Philippines Metro Manila Seventeenth Congress Third Regular Session Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-third day of July, two thousand eighteen AN ACT DEFINING GENDER-BASED SEXUAL HARASSMENT IN STREETS, PUBLIC SPACES, ONLINE, WORKPLACES, AND  EDUCATIONAL  OR  TRAINING  INSTITUTIONS,  PROVIDING
PROTECTIVE MEASURES AND PRESCRIBING continue reading : Republic Act 11313: Safe Spaces Act

	Republic Act 9262: Anti-Violence Against Women and Their Children Act of 2004

March 8, 2004

Declaration of Policy - It is hereby declared that the State values the dignity of women and children and guarantees full respect for human rights. The State also recognizes the need to protect the family and its members particularly women and children, from violence and threats to their personal safety and security.

	Republic Act 9208: Anti-Trafficking in Persons Act of 2003

May 26, 2003

An Act to institute policies to eliminate trafficking in persons especially women and children, establishing the necessary institutional mechanisms for the protection and support of trafficked persons, providing penalties for its violations, and for other purposes.

	Republic Act 9995: Anti-Photo and Video Voyeurism Act of 2009

February 15, 2010

An act defining and penalizing the crime of photo and video voyeurism, prescribing penalties therefor, and for other purposes. Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representative of the Philippines in Congress assembled:

	Republic Act 9775: Anti-Child Pornography Act of 2009

November 17, 2009

An Act defining the crime of child pornography, prescribing penalties therefor and for other purposes.


	Philippine Policy on Anti-Sexual Harassment
Below is a primer for the Expanded Anti-Sexual Harassment Law or the Anti-Bastos Law
914717102929Introduction

On April 17, 2019, the Safe Spaces Act, or popularly known the “Bawal Bastos Law” was signed into law. With the aim of ensuring and individual’s sense of personal space and public safety, the Safe Spaces Act addresses the gender-based sexual harassment in public areas such as streets, privately-owned places open to the public, and public utility vehicles, among others. It also extends the protection even to cyberspace, and provides for prohibited acts and their corresponding penalties.

Here is an outline of this discussion based on the provisions of the law
	Declaration of policies;
	Definition of Terms;
	Gender-Based Streets and Public Spaces Sexual Harassment
	Gender-Based Online Sexual Harassment
	Gender-Based Sexual Harassment in the Workplace
	Gender-Based Sexual Harassment in Educational and Training Institutions.
	Penalties


Definition of the Crime of Sexual Harassment

Sexual Harassment: it is an act or a series of acts involving any unwelcome sexual advance, request or demand for sexual favor, or other verbal or physical behavior of a sexual nature, committed by a government employee or official in a work-related, training or education-related environment (RA 7877)

Sexual harassment refers to unwanted sexual conduct targeted at a particular person or persons that cause or likely to cause mental, emotional or psychological distress, and fear of personal safety , sexual harassment acts including unwanted sexual remarks and comments, threats, and other behavior. (RA 11313)

Title of the Law

The law is RA 11313 or Safe Spaces Act. Its tile is: AN ACT DEFINING GENDER-BASED SEXUAL HARASSMENT IN STREETS, PUBLIC SPACES, ONLINE, WORKPLACES, AND EDUCATIONAL OR TRAINING INSTITUTIONS. PROVIDING PROTECTIVE MEASURES AND PRESCRIBING PENALTIES THEREFOR

914717914653Declaration of Policies

It is the policy of the State to:
	value the dignity of every human person
	guarantee full respect for human rights.
	recognize the role of women in nation-building and ensure the fundamental equality before the law of women and men.
	recognizes that both men and women must have equality, security and safety not only in private, but also on the streets, public spaces, online, workplaces, and educational and training institutions.

Definition of Terms:

(a.) Catcalling refers to unwanted remarks directed towards a person, commonly done in the form of wolf-whistling and misogynistic, transphobic, homophobic, and sexist slurs;

(b.) Employee refers to a person, who in exchange for remuneration, agree to perform specified services for another person, whether natural or juridical, and whether private or public, who exercises fundamental control over the work, regardless of the term or duration of agreement: Provided, That for the purpose of this law, a person who is detailed to an entity under subcontracting or secondment agreement shall be considered an employee;
(c.) Employer refers to a person who exercises control over an employee: Provided, That for the purpose of this Act, the status or conditions of the latter’s employment or engagement shall be disregarded;

(d.) Gender refers to as set of socially ascribed characteristics, norms, roles, attitudes, values and expectations identifying the social behavior of men and women, and the relations between them;

(f.) Gender identity and/or expression refers to the personal sense of identity as characterized, among others, by manner of clothing, inclinations, and behavior in relation to masculine or feminine conventions. A person may have a male or female identity with physiological characteristics of the opposite sex, in which case this person is considered transgender;

(g.) Public spaces refer to streets and alleys, public parks, schools, buildings, malls, bars, restaurants, transportation terminals, public markets, spaces used as evacuation centers, government offices, public utility vehicles as well as private vehicles covered by app-based transport network services and other recreational spaces such as, but not limited to, cinema halls, theaters and spas; and

	Stalking refers to conduct directed at a person involving the repeated visual or physical proximity, non-consensual communication, or a combination thereof that cause

914717914653or will likely cause a person to fear for one’s own safety or the safety of others, or to suffer emotional distress.

TYPES OF SEXUAL HARASSMENT

	Gender-Based Streets and Public Spaces Sexual Harassment (Sec.4)
The crimes of gender-based streets and public spaces sexual harassment are committed through any unwanted and uninvited sexual actions or remarks against any person regardless of the motive for committing such action or remarks.















Whether verbal or physical that is unwanted and has threatened one’s sense of personal space and physical safety, and committed in public spaces such as alleys, sidewalks and parks.
		Gender-Based Sexual Harassment In Restaurants And Cafés, Bars And Clubs, Resorts And Water
( Parks, Hotels and Casinos, Cinemas, Malls, Buildings and Other Privately-Owned Places Open to the Public)(Sec5)

		Shall adopt a zero-tolerance policy against gender-based streets and public spaces sexual harassment;

		These establishments are obliged to provide assistance to victims of gender- based sexual harassment by coordinating with local police authorities immediately after gender-based sexual harassment is reported;
	Making CCTV footage available when ordered by the court, and providing a safe gender-sensitive environment to encourage victims to report gender-based harassment at the first instance.

Can minor be held liable for violating RA 11313?

91471738353In case the offense is committed by a minor, the Department of Social Welfare and Development (DSWD) shall take necessary disciplinary measures as provided for under Republic Act No. 9334, otherwise known as the “Juvenile Justice and Welfare Act of 2006”. (Section 7)

	Gender-Based Sexual Harassment In Public Utility Vehicles.(Sec6)

The LTO may cancel the license of perpetrators found to have committed acts constituting sexual harassment in public utility vehicles, and the LTFRB may suspend or revoke the franchise of transportation operators who commit gender-based streets and public spaces sexual harassment acts.

Gender-based sexual harassment in public utility vehicles (PUVs) where the perpetrator is the driver of the vehicle shall also constitute a breach of contract of carriage for the purpose of creating a presumption of negligence on the part of the owner or operator of the vehicle.

Local Government units (LGUs) shall bear primary responsibility in enforcing the provisions under Article I of this Act. LGU shall have the following duties
	Pass an ordinance which shall localize the applicability of this Act within sixty (60) days of its effectivity;
	Disseminate or post in conspicuous places a copy of this Act and corresponding ordinance
	Provide measures to prevent gender-based sexual harassment in educational institutions, such as information campaigns and anti-sexual harassment seminars.
	Discourages and impose fines on acts of gender-based sexual harassment as defined in this Act;
	Create an anti-sexual harassment hotline; and
	Coordinate with the Department of the Interior and Local Government (DILG) on the implementation of this Act

IMPLEMENTING BODIES FOR GENDER-BASED SEXUAL HARASSMENT IN STREETS AND PUBLIC SPACES

914717914653
















Sec. 11. Specific Acts and Penalties for Gender-Based Sexual Harassment in Streets and Public Spaces

Specific Acts:
		The use of words, gestures or actions that ridicule on the basis of sex, gender or sexual orientation, identify and/or expression including sexist, homophobic, and transphobic statements and slurs;
		The persistent telling of sexual jokes, use of sexual names, comments and demands,
		And any statement that has made an invasion on a person’s personal space or threatens the person’s sense of personal safety.

Penalties:
		The first offense shall be punished by a fine of One Thousand pesos (P1,000) and community service of twelve (12) hours inclusive of attendance to a Gender Sensitivity Seminar to be conducted by the PNP in coordination with the LGU and the PCW;
		The second offense shall be punished by arresto menor (6 to 10 days) or a fine of Three Thousand Pesos (P3,000);
		The third offense shall be punished by arresto menor (11 to 30 days) and a fine of Ten thousand pesos (P10,000).

Specific Acts:
		For acts such as making offensive body gestures at someone, and exposing private parts for the sexual gratification of the perpetrator with the effect of demeaning, harassing, threatening or intimidating the offended party including flashing of private parts, public masturbation, groping and similar lewd sexual actions.

914717914653Penalties:
		The first offense shall be punished by a fine of Ten Thousand Pesos (P10,000.00) and community service of twelve (12) hours inclusive of attendance to a Gender Sensitivity Seminar, to be conducted by the PNP in coordination with the LGU and the PCW;
		The second offense shall be punished by arresto menor ( 11 to 30 days ) or a fine of Fifteen Thousand Pesos (P15,000.00);
		The third offense shall be punished by arresto mayor (1 month and 1 day to 6 months) and a fine of Twenty Thousand Pesos (P20,000.00)

Specific Acts:
		For acts such as stalking, and any of the acts mentioned in Section 11 paragraphs (a) and (b), when accompanied by touching, pinching or brushing against the body of the offended person; or any touching, pinching or brushing against the genitalia, face, buttocks or any part of the victim’s body even when not accompanied by acts mentioned in Section 11 paragraphs (a) and (b)

Penalties:
		The first offense shall be punished arresto menor (11 to 30 days) or fine of Thirty Thousand pesos (P30,000.00), provided that it includes attendance in a Genders Sensitivity Seminar, to be conducted by the PNP in coordination with the LGU and the PCW;
		The second offense shall be punished by arresto mayor in its maximum period or a fine of One Hundred Thousand Pesos (P100,000.00)



	Gender-Based Online Sexual Harassment

		Use information and communications technology in terrorizing and intimidating victims through physical, psychological, and emotional threats;
		Unwanted sexual misogynistic, transphobic, homophobic and sexist remarks and comments online whether publicly or through direct and private messages;
		Invasion of victim’s privacy through cyber stalking and incessant messaging uploading and sharing without the consent of the victim;
	Any form of media that contains photos, voice, or video with sexual content;
		Any unauthorized recording and sharing of any of the victim’s photos, videos, or any information online impersonating identities of victims online or posting lies about victims to harm their reputation;
	Filing, false abuse reports to online platforms to silence victims;

Implementing Bodies For Gender-Based Online Sexual Harassment

914717914653
PNP Anti-Crime Group (PNPACG) as National Operational Support Unit of the PNP which is primarily responsible for the implementation of pertinent Philippine Laws on cybercrime


Functions:
	Receive the complaints of gender-based online sexual harassment
	Develop an online mechanism for reporting real-time gender-based
Penalties for Online Sexual Harassment:

		The penalty of prison correctional in its medium period or a fine of not less than One Hundred Thousand Pesos (P100,000.00) but not more than Five Hundred Thousand Pesos (P500,000.00) or both at the discretion of the court shall be imposed upon any person found guilty of any gender-based online sexual harassment.
		If the perpetrator is juridical person, its license or franchise shall be automatically deemed revoked, and the persons liable shall be the officers thereof, including the editor or reporter in case of broadcast media.
		An alien who commits gender-based online sexual harassment shall be subject to deportation proceedings after serving sentence and payment of fines.


GENDER-BASED SEXUAL HARASSMENT IN THE WORKPLACE (Sec. 16)

	An act or series of acts involving any unwelcome sexual advances, requests or demand for sexual favors or any acts of sexual nature, whether done verbally, physically or through the use of technology such as text messaging or electronic mail or through any other forms of information and communication systems, that has or could have detrimental effect on the conditions of an individual’s employment or education; job performance or opportunities;

	A conduct of sexual nature and other conduct-based on sex affecting the dignity of a person, which is unwelcome, unreasonable and offensive to the recipient whether done verbally, physically or through the use of technology such as text messaging or electronic mail or through any other forms of information and communications systems.

		A conduct that is unwelcome and pervasive and creates an intimidating hostile or humiliating environment for the recipient. Provided, that the crime of gender- based sexual harassment may also be committed between peers and those committed to a superior officer by a subordinate, or to a teacher by a student, or to a trainer by a trainee; and

		914717914653Information and communication system refers to a system for generating sending, receiving storing or otherwise processing electronic data messages or electronic documents and includes the computer system or other similar devices by or in which data are recorded or stored and any procedure related to the recording or storage of electronic data messages or electronic documents.

DUTIES OF EMPLOYERS:

		Disseminate or post in a conspicuous place a copy of this Act to all persons in the workplace;

		Provide measures to prevent gender-based sexual harassment in the workplace, such as the conduct of anti-sexual harassment seminars;

	Create an independent and address complaints of gender-based sexual harassment which shall:
		Adequately represent the management, the employees from the supervisory rank, the rank-and-file employees, and the union, if any:
		Designate a woman as its head and not less than half of its members should be women;
		Be composed of members who should be impartial and not connected or related to the perpetrator;
		Investigate and decide on the complaints within ten (10) days or less upon receipt thereof;
	Observe due process;
	Protect the complainant from retaliation; and
	Guarantee confidentiality to the greatest extent possible.


		Provide and disseminate in consultation with all persons in the workplace a code of conduct or workplace policy which shall:
	Expressly reiterate the prohibition on gender-based sexual harassment;
		Describe the procedures of the internal mechanism created under Section 17 (c) of this Act;
	Set administrative policies.

LIABILITY OF EMPLOYERS

		Any person who violates subsection (a) of this section, shall upon conviction, be penalized with a fine of not less than Five Thousand Pesos (P5,000.00) nor more than Ten Thousand Pesos (P10,000.00)
		Any person who violates subsection (b) of this section, shall upon conviction, be penalized with a fine of not less than Ten Thousand Pesos (P10,000.00) nor more than Fifteen Thousand Pesos (P15,000.00)

914717914653GENDER-BASED SEXUAL HARASSMENT IN EDUCATIONAL AND TRAINING INSTITUTIONS (SEC. 21)

All schools, whether public or private, shall designate an officer-in-charge to receive complaints regarding violations of this Act, and shall ensure that the victims are provided with a gender-sensitive environment that is both respectful to the victims’ needs and conducive to truth-telling.

	If a school knows or reasonably should know about acts of gender-based sexual violence being committed that creates a hostile environment, the school must take immediate action to eliminate the same acts, prevent their recurrence, and address their effects.

	Once a perpetrator is found guilty, the educational institution may reserve the right to strip the diploma from the perpetrator or issue an expulsion order.

The committee on decorum and investigation (CODI) of all educational institutions shall address gender-based sexual harassment and online sexual harassment in accordance with the rules and procedures contained in their CODI manual.

DUTIES OF SCHOOL HEADS

	Disseminate or post a copy of this Act in a conspicuous place in the educational institution;
		Provide measures to prevent gender-based sexual harassment in educational institutions, like information campaigns;
		Create an independent internal mechanism or a CODI to investigate and address complaints of gender-based sexual harassment which shall:
		Adequately represent the school administration, the trainers, instructors, professors or coaches and students or trainees, students and parents, as the case may be;
			Designate a woman as its head and not less than half of its members should be women;
			Ensure equal representation of persons of diverse sexual orientation, identify and/or expression, in the CODI as far as practicable;

	Be composed of members who should be impartial and not connected or related to the alleged perpetrator;

	91471738353Investigate and decide on complaints within ten (10) days or less upon receipt thereof:
	Observe due process;
	Protect the complainant from retaliation; and
8) Guarantee confidentiality to the greatest extent possible
	Provide and disseminate, in consultation with all persons in the educational institution, a code of conduct or school policy which shall;
	Expressly reiterate the prohibition on gender-based sexual harassment
		Prescribe the procedures of the internal mechanism created under this Act; and
	Set administrative penalties.

In addition to liability for committing acts of gender-based sexual harassment, principals, school heads, teachers, instructors, professors, coaches, trainers, or any other person who has authority, influence or moral ascendancy over another in an educational or training institution may also be held responsible for:
	Non-implementation of their duties under Section 22 of this Act, as provided in the penal provision; or
	Failure to act on reported acts of gender-based sexual harassment committed in the educational institution.
Any person who violates subsection (a) of this section shall upon conviction, be penalized with a fine of not less than Five Thousand pesos (P5,000.00) nor more than Ten Thousand pesos (P10,000.00)
Any person who violates subsection (b) of this section, shall upon conviction, be penalized with a fine of not less than Ten Thousand Pesos (P10,000.00) nor more than Fifteen Thousand Pesos (P15,000.00)
Any person who violates subsection (b) of this section, shall upon conviction, be penalized with a fine of not less than Ten Thousand Pesos (P10,000.00) nor more than Fifteen Thousand Pesos (P15,000.00)
Minor students who are found to have committed acts of gender-based sexual harassment shall only be held liable for administrative sanctions by the school as stated in their school handbook.
The Department of Education (DepEd), the Commission on Higher Education (CHED), and the Technical Education and Skills Development Authority (TESDA) shall conduct regular spontaneous inspections to ensure compliance of school heads with their obligations under this Act.








	THE SOGIE BILL
Intended Learning Outcomes:
At the end of this lesson, students should be able to:
		Understand the background, rationale, salient provisions, and potential impacts of the SOGIE Equality Bill once enacted; and
		Have a stand/ position on whether he/she agree/ disagree on the existence and legality of the aforementioned Bill.

Introduction
As cited by Sen. Francis “Kiko” Pangilinan in his explanatory note for House Bill No. 689 entitled “An Act Prohibiting Discrimination on the Basis of Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity or Expression (SOGIE) and Providing Penalties therefor”, the Philippines placed second, after Australia, as the most gay-friendly country among the Asia-Pacific nations and holds the largest and oldest pride demonstration in the Southeast Asian
Region- The Manila Pride March. Furthermore, it was cited that a study conducted by the Pew Research Center, had revealed that 73% of the adult Filipinos agrees that homosexuality should be accepted by the society.
Despite these numbers, SPARTACUS Gay Travel Index 2019, an annual study on how gay friendly countries based on different factors, such as laws and hostility of locals, had the Philippines on the 95th rank out of 197 countries. Also, the Philippines is believed to be only tolerant than accepting of the LGBT community. Despite of the different local legislations enacted against discrimination, a study of the United Nations (UN) revealed that 30% of the LBGT members of the Philippines reported being harassed, bullied, or discriminated while at work on the basis of their SOGIE. In addition, the study showed that 21% of the Filipino respondents believed that they were denied for a job on the basis of their SOGIE.
Other countries such as Canada, Portugal, and Sweden, among others, have already enacted their own anti-discrimination laws. Aside from this, there are five countries in the world today- Bolivia, Ecuador, Fiji, Malta, and the United Kingdom- that have constitutions that explicitly guarantee equality on the basis of SOGIE.
Locally, there are some Local Government that have already legislated ordinances that guarantee the protection of the LGBT communities within their jurisdiction. However, many LGU’s still don’t have this kind of local legislation and incidences of LGBT discrimination are still rampant. Hoping to eliminate the hate and discrimination against the Filipino LGBT community, as well as to provide everyone a safe, equal, and reasonable environment, the Bill is being proposed.


DISCUSSION
Rationale of the SOGIE Equality Bill
The current SOGIE Equality Bill, also referred as Anti-Discrimination Bill, recognizes and aims to safeguard the “fundamental right of every person, regardless of sex, age, class, status, ethnicity, color, disability, religious and political beliefs, sexual orientation and gender identity, to be free from any form of discrimination” (HB 689). As embodied in the 1987 Philippine Constitution, the State shall exert efforts in fulfilling its duties under local and international laws in protecting and upholding the equal rights and dignity of every Filipino. Likewise, the State shall exert efforts in addressing all forms of discrimination and violence as enshrined in the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women, the Convention on the Rights of the Child, and all other relevant and universally accepted human rights instruments and other international conventions to which the Philippines is a signatory.


The Political Battle
The House Bill “An Act Prohibiting Discrimination on the Basis of Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity or Expression (SOGIE) and Providing Penalties therefor”

is a proposed SOGIE Equality Bill specifically crafted in the basis of SOGIE is the first of its kind in the country. There has been numerous anti-discrimination legislations that has been filed in the past but none was based on SOGIE, leaving the LGBT community with others such as differently abled and indigenous groups.


The first version of the SOGIE Equality Bill was filled by the late Senator Mirriam Defensor- Santiago and Akbayan Representative Etta Rosales during the 11th Congress. For almost two decades, it sat idly in the congress and only recently, during the 17th Congress, through the efforts of Bataan 1st District Representative Geraldine Roman- the first transwoman to be elected in the Philippine Congress, that the Bill was reawakened, recalibrated and overcome the resistance in the lower house. However, it is still under debated in the Senate. Some senators have been very vocal about their religious beliefs and strongly oppose the passage of the Bill. Also, different sectors of the society, especially the religious and pro-family groups strongly condemns the aforementioned Bill for they believe that its passage will give way to the legalization of same-sex marriage, same-sex union, marriage equality, and later on, establishment of non-conventional families. As an alternative, senators are looking into a more comprehensive Anti- Discrimination Law that will not just protect the LGBT Community but also other marginalized and vulnerable groups. Nevertheless, proponents of the Bill believes that an Anti-Discrimination Law that is specific for the LGBT community will address the needs which were never understood before due to conservative mindsets. Supporters of the Bill vows to continue the fight for its passage into law. Senator Risa Hontiveros- Baraquel, stressed the importance of a law that protects people from sexual and gender-based discrimination and inequality, and she laments its long overdue.


Target Communities
The Bill seeks to protect those individuals and communities who experience discrimination and violence on the basis of their SOGIE. These communities may include individuals and groups with diverse sexual orientation and gender identity or expression across different ages, socio-economic status, disabilities, ethnicity, cultural background, and religious belief.


Illegal Discriminatory Practices
Under the proposed Bill, the following acts and practices are considered unlawful:
		Promotion and encouragement of stigma on the basis of SOGIE in the any form of media and inciting violence or sexual abuse against any person or group based on their SOGIE;
		Inclusion and disclosure of SOGIE in criteria for employment and human resource movements, compensation and privileges, career development, and employment conditions both for private sectors and public service, which also include the military, police, and other similar services;

		Refusal for admission or expulsion of any person from educational or training institution on the basis of SOGIE, provided that the right of educational and training institutions to determine the academic qualifications of their students are upheld;
		Imposition of disciplinary sanctions, harsher penalties than customary, requirements, restrictions and prohibitions that invade the rights of students on the basis of their SOGIE, including discriminatory practices against students or trainees due to the SOGIE of his/her parents/ guardian;
		Refusal or revocation of accreditation, formal recognition, registration or plan to organize any organization, group, political party, institution or establishment, in educational institutions, workplaces, communities, and other settings, solely on the basis of SOGIE of their members or of their target constituents;
		Denying a person access to public or private health services and facilities open to the general public, as well as access to public or private health insurance;
		Denying an application or revocation of any government license, authority, clearance, permit, certification, or other similar documents necessary for the exercise of profession, business, or any other legitimate transactions;
		Denying a person, access or use of establishments, facilities, utilities, or services, including housing, open to the general public on the basis of their SOGIE;
		Subjecting or forcing a person to undergo medical or psychological examinations to determine or alter the person’s SOGIE, without informed consent, except when the person involved is a child, which needs appropriate approval of a Family Court;
		Subjecting any person to profiling, detention, or verbal or physical harassment, including extortion, on the basis of SOGIE, especially by law enforcement agencies, including the military, police, and immigration; and
		Subjecting a person to any other similar acts or practices that have an effect or purpose of impairing or nullifying the enjoyment, recognition, and exercise of a person’s human rights and fundamental freedoms.

Cases and complaints
Under the proposed Bill, the existing Women and Children’s Desk of all police stations will be redressed in to Women, Children, and LGBTQ ++ Protection Desk. The complaint desk will still cater its former function for women and children issues, but will just have an additional task on attending to cases on LGBT discrimination. With this, the proposed bill will mandate the assigned desk officers to undergo trainings on gender sensitivity, proper terminologies, dynamics of LGBTQ relationships, and how to properly handle hate crimes investigations.


The Anti-Discrimination on Same –sex Marriage
Contrary to the belief and fear of different sectors, especially the church and family advocates, the proponents of the current Anti-Discrimination Law clarified that the bill does not include any provisions on the legalization of same-sex marriage, nor marriage equality. They emphasized that proposed legislation only safeguards the fundamental right of the members of LGBT community to be free from any forms of harassment and violence in carrying out their daily living, in respect to the rights also of other citizens. The

legislators also pointed out that they had carefully specified the issuance of professional and business licenses, and alike, but it does not include marriage license.


